STYLE FONT FAMILY WINGDINGS 120 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15 d OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
168 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15 d OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the transition period
Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter
State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization
Registrant 146 s telephone number, including area code
Securities registered pursuant to Section  12 g  of the Act None
Registrant is a well known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes   FONT
Indicate by check mark if the Registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section  13 or Section  15 d of the Act.
STYLE font family Times New Roman 120 Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant
1  has filed all reports required to be filed by Section  13 or 15 d  of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to file such reports , and
2  has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes   FONT
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File
required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S T 167 232.405 of this chapter during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required to submit and post such files .
STYLE font family Times New Roman 168 Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent
filers pursuant to Item  405 of Regulation S K 167 229.405 of this chapter is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the Registrant 146 s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10 K or any amendment to this Form 10 K.   FONT
STYLE FONT FAMILY WINGDINGS 120 Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer,
a non accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of 147 large accelerated filer, 148 147 accelerated filer 148 and 147 smaller reporting company 148 in Rule 12b 2 of the Exchange Act.
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a shell company as defined in Rule 12b 2 of the Act .
STYLE font family Times New Roman 120 The aggregate market value of the voting and non voting
stock held by non affiliates of the Registrant, as of March  27, 2015, the last business day of the Registrant 146 s most recently completed second fiscal quarter, was approximately 709,923,000,000. Solely for purposes of this disclosure,
shares of common stock held by executive officers and directors of the Registrant as of such date have been excluded because such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. This determination of executive officers and directors as affiliates is not
necessarily a conclusive determination for any other purposes. 5,575,331,000 shares of common stock were issued and outstanding as of October  9,
Portions of the Registrant 146 s definitive proxy statement relating to its 2016 annual meeting of shareholders the 147 2016 Proxy Statement 148
are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10 K where indicated. The 2016 Proxy Statement will be filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year to which this
Market for Registrant 146 s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Management 146 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence
This Annual Report on Form 10 K 147 Form 10 K 148 contains FONT
STYLE white space nowrap forward looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Many of the forward looking statements are located in Part II,
Item  7 of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Management 146 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 148 Forward looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain
assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward looking statements can also be identified by words such as 147 future, 148 147 anticipates, 148 147 believes, 148
147 estimates, 148 147 expects, 148 147 intends, 148 147 will, 148 147 would, 148 147 could, 148 147 can, 148 147 may, 148 and similar terms. Forward looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the
Company 146 s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed
in Part I, Item  1A of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Risk Factors, 148 which are incorporated herein by reference. All information presented herein is based on the Company 146 s fiscal
calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company 146 s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the
147 Company 148 and 147 Apple 148 as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward looking statements for any
The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a
variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third party digital content and applications. The Company 146 s products and services include iPhone reg , iPad SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg , Mac reg , iPod reg , Apple
Watch reg , Apple TV reg , a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, iOS, OS X SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg and watchOS 153 operating systems, iCloud reg , Apple Pay reg and a variety of
accessory, service and support offerings. In September 2015, the Company announced a new Apple TV, tvOS 153 operating system and Apple TV App Store reg , which are expected to be available by
the end of October 2015. The Company sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store reg , App Store, Mac App Store, iBooks Store 153 and Apple Music 153
collectively 147 Internet Services 148 . The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added
resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third party Apple compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid sized businesses
and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company 146 s fiscal year is the 52 or 53 week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company is a California corporation established in 1977.
Business Strategy The Company is committed to bringing the
best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software and services. The Company 146 s business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software and
services to provide its customers products and solutions with innovative design, superior ease of use and seamless integration. As part of its strategy, the Company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of digital content
and applications through its Internet Services, which allows customers to discover and download digital content, iOS, Mac and Apple Watch applications, and books through either a Mac or Windows based computer or through iPhone, iPad and iPod touch SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg devices 147 iOS devices 148 and Apple Watch. The Company also supports a community for the development of third party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the
Company 146 s offerings. The Company believes a high quality buying experience with knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the Company 146 s products and services greatly enhances its ability to attract and retain customers.
Therefore, the Company 146 s strategy also includes building and expanding its own retail and online stores and its third party distribution network to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high quality sales and post sales
support experience. The Company believes ongoing investment in research and development 147 R amp D 148 , marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and technologies.
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. In 2015, the Company changed its reportable operating segments as management began
reporting business performance and making decisions primarily on a geographic basis, including the results of its retail stores in each respective geographic segment. Accordingly, the Company 146 s reportable operating segments consist of the
Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment
includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company 146 s other reportable operating segments. Although each reportable operating segment provides similar
hardware and software products and similar services, they are managed separately to better align with the location of the Company 146 s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further
information regarding the Company 146 s reportable operating segments may be found in Part II, Item  7 of this Form 10 K under the subheading 147 Segment Operating Performance, 148 and in Part II,
Item  8 of this Form 10 K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, 147 Segment Information and Geographic Data. 148 Products
smartphones based on its iOS operating system. iPhone includes Siri reg , a voice activated intelligent assistant, and Apple Pay and Touch ID 153 on qualifying devices. In September 2015, the
Company introduced iPhone 6s and 6s Plus, featuring 3D Touch, which senses force to access features and interact with content and apps. iPhone works with the iTunes Store, App Store and iBooks Store for purchasing, organizing and playing digital
content and apps. iPhone is compatible with both Mac and Windows personal computers and Apple 146 s iCloud services, which provide synchronization across users 146 devices.
iPad iPad is the Company 146 s line of multi purpose tablets
based on its iOS operating system, which includes iPad Air reg and iPad mini 153 . iPad includes Siri and also includes Touch ID on qualifying devices. In September 2015, the Company announced
the new iPad Pro 153 , featuring a 12.9 inch Retina reg display, which is expected to be available in November 2015. iPad works with the iTunes Store, App Store and iBooks Store for purchasing,
organizing and playing digital content and apps. iPad is compatible with both Mac and Windows personal computers and Apple 146 s iCloud services. Mac
Mac is the Company 146 s line of desktop and portable personal computers based on its OS X operating system. The Company 146 s desktop computers include
iMac reg , 21.5 148 iMac with Retina 4K Display, 27 148 iMac with Retina 5K Display, Mac Pro reg and Mac mini. The Company 146 s portable
computers include MacBook reg , MacBook Air reg , MacBook Pro reg and MacBook Pro with
iOS is the Company 146 s Multi Touch 153 operating system that serves as the foundation for iOS devices. Devices running iOS are compatible with both
Mac and Windows personal computers and Apple 146 s iCloud services. In September 2015, the Company released iOS 9, which provides more search abilities and improved Siri features. iOS 9 also introduced new multitasking features designed
specifically for iPad, including Slide Over and Split View, which allow users to work with two apps simultaneously, and Picture in Picture that allows users to watch a video while using another application.
OS X OS X is the Company 146 s Mac operating system and is built on
an open source UNIX based foundation and provides an intuitive and integrated computer experience. Support for iCloud is built into OS X so users can access content and information from Mac, iOS devices and other supported devices and access
downloaded content and apps from the iTunes Store. OS X El Capitan, released in September 2015, is the 12th major release of OS X and incorporates additional window management features, including
Split View and the new Spaces Bar in Mission Control reg , which provides users an intuitive way to group applications.
Company 146 s operating system for Apple Watch. Released in September 2015, watchOS 2 is the first major software update for Apple Watch, providing users with new features, including new watch faces, the ability to add third party app information
on watch faces, Time Travel, and additional communication capabilities in Mail, Friends and Digital Touch. watchOS 2 also gives developers the ability to build native apps for Apple Watch.
tvOS In September 2015, the Company announced tvOS, its operating
system for the new Apple TV, which is expected to be available at the end of October 2015. The tvOS operating system is based on the Company 146 s iOS platform and will enable developers to create new apps and games specifically for Apple TV and
deliver them to customers through the new Apple TV App Store. Application Software
The Company 146 s application software includes iLife reg , iWork SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg and various other software, including Final Cut Pro reg , Logic reg Pro X and
FileMaker reg Pro. iLife is the Company 146 s consumer oriented digital lifestyle software application suite included with all Mac computers and features iMovie SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg , a digital video editing application, and GarageBand reg , a music creation application that allows users to play, record and create music.
iWork is the Company 146 s integrated productivity suite included with all Mac computers and is designed to help users create, present and publish documents through Pages reg , presentations
through Keynote reg and spreadsheets through Numbers reg . The Company also has Multi Touch versions of iLife and iWork applications designed
specifically for use on iOS devices, which are available as free downloads for all new iPhones and iPads. Services
Internet Services The iTunes Store, available for iOS devices, Mac and
Windows personal computers and Apple TV, allows customers to purchase and download music and TV shows, rent or purchase movies and download free podcasts. The App Store, available for iOS devices, allows customers to discover and download apps and
purchase in app content. The Mac App Store, available for Mac computers, allows customers to discover, download and install Mac applications. The iBooks Store, available for iOS devices and Mac computers, features e books from major and independent
publishers. Apple Music offers users a curated listening experience with on demand radio stations that evolve based on a user 146 s play or download activity and a subscription based internet streaming service that also provides unlimited access to
the Apple Music library. In September 2015, the Company announced the Apple TV App Store, which provides customers access to apps and games specifically for the new Apple TV.
iCloud iCloud is the Company 146 s cloud service which stores music,
photos, contacts, calendars, mail, documents and more, keeping them up to date and available across multiple iOS devices, Mac and Windows personal computers and Apple TV. iCloud services include iCloud Drive SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top SM, iCloud Photo Library, Family Sharing, Find My iPhone, Find My Friends, Notes, iCloud Keychain reg and iCloud Backup for iOS devices.
AppleCare reg offers a range of support options for the Company 146 s customers. These
include assistance that is built into software products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, the AppleCare Protection Plan 147 APP 148 and the
AppleCare Protection Plan 147 AC 148 . APP is a fee based service that typically extends the service coverage of phone support, hardware repairs and dedicated web based support resources for Mac, Apple TV and display products. AC is a
fee based service offering additional coverage under some circumstances for instances of accidental damage in addition to the services offered by APP and is available in certain countries for iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and iPod.
Apple Pay Apple Pay is the Company 146 s mobile payment service
available in the U.S. and U.K. that offers an easy, secure and private way to pay. Apple Pay allows users to pay for purchases in stores accepting contactless payments and to pay for purchases within participating apps on qualifying devices. Apple
Pay accepts credit and debit cards across major card networks and also supports reward programs and store issued credit and debit cards.
The Company sells a variety of Apple branded and third party Mac compatible and iOS compatible accessories, including Apple TV, Apple Watch, headphones,
displays, storage devices, Beats products, and various other connectivity and computing products and supplies. Apple TV
Apple TV connects to consumers 146 TVs and enables them to access digital content directly for streaming high definition video, playing music and games,
and viewing photos. Content from Apple Music and other media services are also available on Apple TV. Apple TV allows streaming digital content from Mac and Windows personal computers through Home Share and through AirPlay SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg from compatible Mac and iOS devices. In September 2015, the Company announced the new Apple TV running on the Company 146 s tvOS operating system and based on apps built for the television.
Additionally, the new Apple TV remote features Siri, allowing users to search and access content with their voice. The new Apple TV is expected to be available at the end of October 2015.
Apple Watch Apple Watch is a personal electronic device that combines
the watchOS user interface and technologies created specifically for a smaller device, including the Digital Crown, a unique navigation tool that allows users to seamlessly scroll, zoom and navigate, and Force Touch, a technology that senses the
difference between a tap and a press and allows users to access controls within apps. Apple Watch enables users to communicate in new ways from their wrist, track their health and fitness through activity and workout apps, and includes Siri and
Apple Pay. iPod iPod is the Company 146 s line of portable
digital music and media players, which includes iPod touch, iPod nano reg and iPod shuffle reg . All iPods work with iTunes to purchase and
synchronize content. iPod touch, based on the Company 146 s iOS operating system, is a flash memory based iPod that works with the iTunes Store, App Store and iBooks Store for purchasing and playing digital content and apps.
Developer Programs The Company 146 s developer programs
support app developers with building, testing and distributing apps for iOS, Mac, Apple Watch and the new Apple TV. Developer program membership provides access to beta software, the ability to integrate advanced app capabilities e.g.,
iCloud,  Game Center and Apple Pay , distribution on the App Store, access to App Analytics, and code level technical support. Developer programs  also exist for businesses creating apps for internal use the Apple Developer Enterprise
Program and developers creating accessories for  Apple devices the MFi Program . All developers, even those who are not developer program members, can sign in with their Apple ID to post on the  Apple Developer Forums and use Xcode SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg , the Company 146 s integrated development environment for creating apps for Apple platforms. Xcode includes project management tools analysis tools to collect, display and compare app
performance data simulation tools to locally run, test and debug apps and tools to simplify the design and development of user interfaces. All developers also have access to extensive technical documentation and sample code.
Markets and Distribution The Company 146 s customers are
primarily in the consumer, small and mid sized business, education, enterprise and government markets. The Company sells its products and resells third party products in most of its major markets directly to consumers and small and mid sized
businesses through its retail and online stores and its direct sales force. The Company also employs a variety of indirect distribution channels, such as third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added resellers. During
2015, the Company 146 s net sales through its direct and indirect distribution channels accounted for  26 and  74 , respectively, of total net sales.
The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the
hardware and software integration and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. The Company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its
products over those of its competitors and providing a high quality sales and after sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers.
To ensure a high quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to build and improve its
distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. The Company 146 s retail stores are typically located at high traffic locations in quality shopping malls and urban shopping districts. By operating its own
stores and locating them in desirable high traffic locations the Company is better positioned to ensure a high quality customer buying experience and attract new customers. The stores are designed to simplify and enhance the presentation and
marketing of the Company 146 s products and related solutions. The retail stores employ experienced and knowledgeable personnel who provide product advice, service and training and offer a wide selection of third party hardware, software and other
accessories that complement the Company 146 s products.
The Company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures,
merchandising materials and other resources within selected third party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of product expertise,
integration and support services. The Company is committed to delivering solutions to help educators teach and students learn. The Company believes
effective integration of technology into classroom instruction can result in higher levels of student achievement and has designed a range of products, services and programs to address the needs of education customers. The Company also supports
mobile learning and real time distribution of, and access to, education related materials through iTunes U, a platform that allows students and teachers to share and distribute educational media online. The Company sells its products to the
education market through its direct sales force, select third party resellers and its online and retail stores. The Company also sells its hardware
and software products to enterprise and government customers in each of its reportable operating segments. The Company 146 s products are deployed in these markets because of their performance, productivity, ease of use and seamless integration
into information technology environments. The Company 146 s products are compatible with thousands of third party business applications and services, and its tools enable the development and secure deployment of custom applications as well as
remote device administration. No single customer accounted for more than 10 of net sales in 2015, 2014 or 2013.
Competition The markets for the Company 146 s products and
services are highly competitive and the Company is confronted by aggressive competition in all areas of its business. These markets are characterized by frequent product introductions and rapid technological advances that have substantially
increased the capabilities and use of mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and other digital electronic devices. The Company 146 s competitors that sell mobile devices and personal computers based on other operating systems
have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins to gain or maintain market share. The Company 146 s financial condition and operating results can be adversely affected by these and other industry wide downward pressures on gross
margins. Principal competitive factors important to the Company include price, product features including security features , relative price and performance, product quality and reliability, design innovation, a strong third party software and
accessories ecosystem, marketing and distribution capability, service and support and corporate reputation. The Company is focused on expanding its
market opportunities related to personal computers and mobile communication and media devices. These markets are highly competitive and include many large, well funded and experienced participants. The Company expects competition in these markets to
intensify significantly as competitors attempt to imitate some of the features of the Company 146 s products and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more competitive than
those they currently offer. These markets are characterized by aggressive pricing practices, frequent product introductions, evolving design approaches and technologies, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors and
price sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses. The Company 146 s digital content services have faced significant competition from other
companies promoting their own digital music and content products and services, including those offering free peer to peer music and video services.
The Company 146 s future financial condition and operating results depend on the Company 146 s ability to continue to develop and offer new innovative
products and services in each of the markets in which it competes. The Company believes it offers superior innovation and integration of the entire solution including the hardware iOS devices, Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV , software iOS, OS X,
watchOS and tvOS , online services and distribution of digital content and applications Internet Services . Some of the Company 146 s current and potential competitors have substantial resources and may be able to provide such products and
services at little or no profit or even at a loss to compete with the Company 146 s offerings. Supply of Components
Although most components essential to the Company 146 s business are generally available from multiple sources, a number of components are currently
obtained from single or limited sources. In addition, the Company competes for various components with other participants in the markets for mobile communication and media devices and personal computers. Therefore, many components used by the
Company, including those that are available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide shortage and significant pricing fluctuations that could materially adversely affect the Company 146 s financial condition and operating
The Company uses some custom components that are not commonly used by its competitors, and the Company often
utilizes custom components available from only one source. When a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers 146 yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. If the
Company 146 s supply of components were delayed or constrained, or if an outsourcing partner delayed shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely
affected. The Company 146 s business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from
an alternative source. Continued availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers concentrated on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the Company 146 s
requirements. The Company has entered into agreements for the supply of many components however, there can be no guarantee that the Company will be
able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. Therefore, the Company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that could materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating
results. While some Mac computers are manufactured in the U.S. and Ireland, substantially all of the Company 146 s hardware products are currently
manufactured by outsourcing partners that are located primarily in Asia. A significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a small number of outsourcing partners, often in single locations. Certain of these outsourcing
partners are the sole sourced suppliers of components and manufacturers for many of the Company 146 s products. Although the Company works closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the Company 146 s operating results could
be adversely affected if its outsourcing partners were unable to meet their production commitments. The Company 146 s purchase commitments typically cover its requirements for periods up to 150 days.
Research and Development Because the industries in which the
Company competes are characterized by rapid technological advances, the Company 146 s ability to compete successfully depends heavily upon its ability to ensure a continual and timely flow of competitive products, services and technologies to the
marketplace. The Company continues to develop new technologies to enhance existing products and to expand the range of its product offerings through R amp D, licensing of intellectual property and acquisition of third party businesses and
technology. Total R amp D expense was 8.1 billion, 6.0 billion and 4.5 billion in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Patents, Trademarks, Copyrights and
Licenses The Company currently holds rights to patents and copyrights relating to certain aspects of its hardware devices, accessories, software
and services. The Company has registered or has applied for trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and a number of foreign countries. Although the Company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and service marks is an
important factor in its business and that its success does depend in part on such ownership, the Company relies primarily on the innovative skills, technical competence and marketing abilities of its personnel.
The Company regularly files patent applications to protect innovations arising from its research, development and design, and is currently pursuing
thousands of patent applications around the world.  Over time, the Company has accumulated a large portfolio of issued patents around the world.  The Company holds copyrights relating to certain aspects of its products and services. No
single patent or copyright is solely responsible for protecting the Company 146 s products. The Company believes the duration of its patents is adequate relative to the expected lives of its products.
Many of the Company 146 s products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third parties. It may be necessary in the future to seek
or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its products, processes and services. While the Company has generally been able to obtain such licenses on commercially reasonable terms in the past, there is no guarantee that such licenses could be
obtained in the future on reasonable terms or at all. Because of technological changes in the industries in which the Company competes, current extensive patent coverage and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible that certain
components of the Company 146 s products, processes and services may unknowingly infringe existing patents or intellectual property rights of others. From time to time, the Company has been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or
other intellectual property rights of third parties. Foreign and Domestic Operations and Geographic Data
During 2015, the Company 146 s domestic and international net sales accounted for  35 and  65 , respectively, of total net
sales.  Information regarding financial data by geographic segment is set forth in Part II, Item  7 of this Form 10 K under the subheading 147 Segment Operating Performance, 148 and in Part II, Item  8 of this Form FONT
STYLE white space nowrap 10 K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, 147 Segment Information and Geographic Data. 148
While some Mac computers are manufactured in the U.S. and Ireland, substantially all of the Company 146 s
hardware products are currently manufactured by outsourcing partners that are located primarily in Asia. The supply and manufacture of a number of components is performed by sole sourced outsourcing partners in the U.S., Asia and Europe. Margins on
sales of the Company 146 s products in foreign countries and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade
regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. Information regarding concentration in the available sources of supply of materials and products is set forth in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K
in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, 147 Commitments and Contingencies. 148 Business Seasonality and Product Introductions
The Company has historically experienced higher net sales in its first quarter compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due in part to seasonal
holiday demand. Additionally, new product introductions can significantly impact net sales, product costs and operating expenses. Product introductions can also impact the Company 146 s net sales to its indirect distribution channels as these
channels are filled with new product inventory following a product introduction, and often, channel inventory of a particular product declines as the next related major product launch approaches. Net sales can also be affected when consumers and
distributors anticipate a product introduction. However, neither historical seasonal patterns nor historical patterns of product introductions should be considered reliable indicators of the Company 146 s future pattern of product introductions,
future net sales or financial performance. Warranty The
Company offers a limited parts and labor warranty on most of its hardware products. The basic warranty period is typically one year from the date of purchase by the original end user. The Company also offers a
90 day basic warranty for its service parts used to repair the Company 146 s hardware products. In certain jurisdictions, local law requires that manufacturers guarantee their products for a period prescribed
by statute, typically at least two years. In addition, where available, consumers may purchase APP or AC , which extends service coverage on many of the Company 146 s hardware products.
Backlog In the Company 146 s experience, the actual amount of
product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases immediately following new product introductions as customers anticipate shortages. Backlog is often
reduced once customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company 146 s ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
Employees As of September  26, 2015, the Company had
approximately 110,000 full time equivalent employees. Available Information
The Company 146 s Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to reports filed pursuant to
Sections 13 a and 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended the 147 Exchange Act 148 , are filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission the 147 SEC 148 . The Company is subject to the informational requirements of the
Exchange Act and files or furnishes reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. Such reports and other information filed by the Company with the SEC are available free of charge on the Company 146 s website at
investor.apple.com sec.cfm when such reports are available on the SEC 146 s website. The public may read and copy any materials filed by the Company with the SEC at the SEC 146 s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Room 1580,
Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. The SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other
information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC at www.sec.gov. The contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. Further, the Company 146 s references to website URLs are intended to be inactive
Risk Factors The following discussion of risk factors contains forward looking statements. These
risk factors may be important to understanding other statements in this Form 10 K. The following information should be read in conjunction with Part II, Item  7, 147 Management 146 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations 148 and the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part II, Item  8, 147 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 148 of this Form 10 K.
The business, financial condition and operating results of the Company can be affected by a number of factors, whether currently known or unknown,
including but not limited to those described below, any one or more of which could, directly or indirectly, cause the Company 146 s actual financial condition and operating results to vary materially from past, or from anticipated future, financial
condition and operating results. Any of these factors, in whole or in part, could materially and adversely affect the Company 146 s business, financial condition, operating results and stock price.
Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results, past financial
performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
Global and regional economic conditions could materially adversely affect the Company.
The Company 146 s operations and performance depend significantly on global and regional economic conditions. Uncertainty about global and regional
economic conditions poses a risk as consumers and businesses may postpone spending in  response to tighter credit, higher unemployment, financial market volatility, government austerity programs, negative financial news, declines in income or
asset values and or other factors. These worldwide and regional economic conditions could have a material adverse effect on demand for the Company 146 s products and services. Demand also could differ materially from the Company 146 s expectations
as a result of currency fluctuations because the Company generally raises prices on goods and services sold outside the U.S. to correspond with the effect of a strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Other factors that could influence worldwide or
regional demand include changes in fuel and other energy costs, conditions in the real estate and mortgage markets, unemployment, labor and healthcare costs, access to credit, consumer confidence and other macroeconomic factors affecting consumer
spending behavior. These and other economic factors could materially adversely affect demand for the Company 146 s products and services. In the
event of financial turmoil affecting the banking system and financial  markets, additional consolidation of the financial services industry, or significant financial service institution failures, there could be tightening in the
credit  markets, low liquidity and  extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity markets. This  could have a number of effects on  the Company 146 s business, including the insolvency or financial instability of
outsourcing partners or suppliers or their inability to obtain credit to finance development and or manufacture products resulting in  product delays inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to finance  purchases
of the Company 146 s products failure of derivative counterparties and other financial institutions and restrictions on the Company 146 s ability to issue new debt. Other income and  expense also could vary materially from expectations
depending on gains or losses  realized on the sale or exchange of financial instruments impairment charges resulting from revaluations of debt and equity  securities and other investments changes in interest rates  increases or
decreases in cash balances volatility in foreign exchange rates and changes in fair value of derivative instruments.  Increased volatility in the financial markets and overall economic  uncertainty would increase the risk of the actual
amounts realized in the  future on the Company 146 s financial instruments differing significantly  from the fair values currently assigned to them.
Global markets for the Company 146 s products and services are highly competitive and subject to rapid technological change, and the
Company may be unable to compete effectively in these markets. The Company 146 s products and services compete in highly competitive global
markets characterized by aggressive price cutting and resulting downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product price performance
characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors and price sensitivity on the part of consumers. The
Company 146 s ability to compete successfully depends heavily on its ability to ensure a continuing and timely introduction of innovative new products, services and technologies to the marketplace. The Company believes it is unique in that it
designs and develops nearly the entire solution for its products, including the hardware, operating system, numerous software applications and related services. As a result, the Company must make significant investments in R amp D. The Company
currently holds a significant number of patents and copyrights and has registered and or has applied to register numerous patents, trademarks and service marks. In contrast, many of the Company 146 s competitors seek to compete primarily through
aggressive pricing and very low cost structures, and emulating  the Company 146 s  products and infringing on  its  intellectual property. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new products with
attractive margins or if competitors infringe on the Company 146 s intellectual property, the Company 146 s ability to maintain a competitive advantage could be adversely affected.
The Company markets certain mobile communication and media devices based on the iOS mobile operating system
and also markets related third party digital content and applications. The Company faces substantial competition in these markets from companies that have significant technical, marketing, distribution and other resources, as well as established
hardware, software and digital content supplier relationships and the Company has a minority market share in the global smartphone market. Additionally, the Company faces significant price competition as competitors reduce their selling prices and
attempt to imitate the Company 146 s product features and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more competitive than those they currently offer. The Company competes with
business models that include content provided to users for free. The Company also competes with illegitimate ways to obtain third party digital content and applications. Some of the Company 146 s competitors have greater experience, product breadth
and distribution channels than the Company. Because some current and potential competitors have substantial resources and or experience and a lower cost structure, they may be able to provide products and services at little or no profit or even at a
loss. The Company also expects competition to intensify as competitors attempt to imitate the Company 146 s approach to providing components seamlessly within their individual offerings or work collaboratively to offer integrated solutions. The
Company 146 s financial condition and operating results depend substantially on the Company 146 s ability to continually improve iOS and iOS devices in order to maintain their functional and design advantages.
The Company is the only authorized maker of hardware using OS X, which has a minority market share in the personal computer market. This market has been
contracting and is dominated by computer makers using competing operating systems, most notably Windows. In the market for personal computers and accessories, the Company faces a significant number of competitors, many of which have broader product
lines, lower priced products and a larger installed customer base. Historically, consolidation in this market has resulted in larger competitors. Price competition has been particularly intense as competitors selling Windows based personal computers
have aggressively cut prices and lowered product margins. An increasing number of internet enabled devices that include software applications and are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers compete for market share with the
Company 146 s existing products. The Company 146 s financial condition and operating results also depend on its ability to continually improve the Mac platform to maintain its functional and design advantages.
There can be no assurance the Company will be able to continue to provide products and services that compete effectively.
To remain competitive and stimulate customer demand, the Company must successfully manage frequent product introductions and transitions.
Due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of the industries in which the Company competes, the Company must continually introduce new
products, services and technologies, enhance existing products and services, effectively stimulate customer demand for new and upgraded products and successfully manage the transition to these new and upgraded products. The success of new product
introductions depends on a number of factors including, but not limited to, timely and successful product development, market acceptance, the Company 146 s ability to manage the risks associated with new product production ramp up issues, the
availability of application software for new products, the effective management of purchase commitments and inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities and at expected costs to
meet anticipated demand and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects or deficiencies in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect of new product introductions and
transitions. The Company depends on the performance of distributors, carriers and other resellers.
The Company distributes its products through cellular network carriers, wholesalers, national and regional retailers and value added resellers, many of
whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. The Company also sells its products and third party products in most of its major markets directly to education, enterprise and government customers and consumers and small and mid sized
businesses through its online and retail stores. Carriers providing cellular network service for iPhone typically subsidize users 146 purchases of
the device. There is no assurance that such subsidies will be continued at all or in the same amounts upon renewal of the Company 146 s agreements with these carriers or in agreements the Company enters into with new carriers.
Many resellers have narrow operating margins and have been adversely affected in the past by weak economic
conditions. Some resellers have perceived the expansion of the Company 146 s direct sales as conflicting with their business interests as distributors and resellers of the Company 146 s products. Such a perception could discourage resellers from
investing resources in the distribution and sale of the Company 146 s products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of those products. The Company has invested and will continue to invest in programs to enhance reseller sales, including
staffing selected resellers 146 stores with Company employees and contractors, and improving product placement displays. These programs could require a substantial investment while providing no assurance of return or incremental revenue. The
financial condition of these resellers could weaken, these resellers could stop distributing the Company 146 s products, or uncertainty regarding demand for some or all of the Company 146 s products could cause resellers to reduce their ordering
and marketing of the Company 146 s products. The Company faces substantial inventory and other asset risk in addition to purchase
commitment cancellation risk. The Company records a write down for product and component inventories that have become obsolete or exceed
anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary cancellation fee reserves for orders of excess products and components. The Company also reviews its long lived assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers 146 facilities
and inventory prepayments, for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that impairment has occurred, it records a write down equal to the amount by which
the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair value. Although the Company believes its provisions related to inventory, capital assets, inventory prepayments and other assets and purchase commitments are currently adequate, no assurance can be
given that the Company will not incur additional related charges given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the industries in which the Company competes.
The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product announcements and shipments. Consistent with industry
practice, components are normally acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts and open orders, in each case based on projected demand. Where appropriate,  the  purchases are applied to  inventory component
prepayments  that are  outstanding with the  respective supplier. Purchase commitments typically cover forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. Because the Company 146 s markets are volatile,
competitive and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and order or produce excess or insufficient amounts of components or products, or not fully utilize firm purchase commitments.
Future operating results depend upon the Company 146 s ability to obtain components in sufficient quantities.
Because the Company currently obtains components from single or limited sources, the Company is subject to significant supply and pricing risks. Many
components, including those that are available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide shortages and significant commodity pricing fluctuations. While the Company has entered into agreements for the supply of many components,
there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. A number of suppliers of components may suffer from poor financial conditions, which can lead to business failure for the
supplier or consolidation within a particular industry, further limiting the Company 146 s ability to obtain sufficient quantities of components. The effects of global or regional economic conditions on  the Company 146 s suppliers, described
in 147 Global and regional economic conditions could materially adversely affect the Company 148 above, also could affect the Company 146 s ability to obtain components. Therefore, the Company remains subject to significant risks
of supply shortages and price increases. The Company and other participants in the markets for mobile communication and media devices and personal
computers also compete for various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some custom components that are not common to the rest of these industries. The Company 146 s new
products often utilize custom components available from only one source. When a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers 146 yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased.
Continued availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected for any number of reasons, including if those suppliers decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet
the Company 146 s requirements. The supply of components for a new or existing product could be delayed or constrained, or a key manufacturing vendor could delay shipments of completed products to the Company.
The Company depends on component and product manufacturing and logistical services provided by
outsourcing partners, many of which are located outside of the U.S. Substantially all of the Company 146 s manufacturing is performed in
whole or in part by a few outsourcing partners located primarily in Asia. The Company has also outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While these arrangements may lower operating costs, they also reduce the Company 146 s
direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of products or services, or the Company 146 s flexibility to respond to changing conditions. Although
arrangements with these partners may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain responsible to the consumer for warranty service in the event of product defects and could experience an unanticipated product defect
or warranty liability. While the Company relies on its partners to adhere to its supplier code of conduct, material violations of the supplier code of conduct could occur.
The Company relies on sole sourced outsourcing partners in the U.S., Asia and Europe to supply and manufacture many critical components, and on
outsourcing partners primarily located in Asia, for final assembly of substantially all of the Company 146 s hardware products. Any failure of these partners to perform may have a negative impact on the Company 146 s cost or supply of components
or finished goods. In addition, manufacturing or logistics in these locations or transit to final destinations may be disrupted for a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, natural and man made disasters, information technology system
failures, commercial disputes, military actions or economic, business, labor, environmental, public health, or political issues. The Company has
invested in manufacturing process equipment, much of which is held at certain of its outsourcing partners, and has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long term supply agreements. While these arrangements help ensure the
supply of components and finished goods, if these outsourcing partners or suppliers experience severe financial problems or other disruptions in their business, such continued supply could be reduced or terminated and the net realizable value of
these assets could be negatively impacted. The Company 146 s products and services may experience quality problems from time to time
that can result in decreased sales and operating margin and harm to the Company 146 s reputation. The Company sells complex hardware and
software products and services that can contain design and manufacturing defects. Sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as those sold by the Company, often contain 147 bugs 148 that can unexpectedly interfere with the
software 146 s intended operation. The Company 146 s online services may from time to time experience outages, service slowdowns, or errors. Defects may also occur in components and products the Company purchases from third parties. There can be
no assurance the Company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware, software and services it sells. Failure to do so could result in lost revenue, significant warranty and other expenses and harm to the Company 146 s reputation.
The Company relies on access to third party digital content, which may not be available to the Company on commercially reasonable terms
or at all. The Company contracts with numerous third parties to offer their digital content. This includes the right to sell currently
available music, movies, TV shows and books. The licensing or other distribution arrangements with these third parties are for relatively short terms and do not guarantee the continuation or renewal of these arrangements on reasonable terms, if at
all. Some third party content providers and distributors currently or in the future may offer competing products and services, and could take action to make it more difficult or impossible for the Company to license or otherwise distribute their
content in the future. Other content owners, providers or distributors may seek to limit the Company 146 s access to, or increase the cost of, such content. The Company may be unable to continue to offer a wide variety of content at reasonable
prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue to expand its geographic reach. Failure to obtain the right to make available third party digital content, or to make available such content on commercially reasonable terms, could have a material
adverse impact on the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results. Some third party digital content providers require the Company to
provide digital rights management and other security solutions. If requirements change, the Company may have to develop or license new technology to provide these solutions. There is no assurance the Company will be able to develop or license such
solutions at a reasonable cost and in a timely manner. In addition, certain countries have passed or may propose and adopt legislation that would force the Company to license its digital rights management, which could lessen the protection of
content and subject it to piracy and also could negatively affect arrangements with the Company 146 s content providers.
The Company 146 s future performance depends in part on support from FONT
STYLE white space nowrap third party software developers. The Company believes decisions by customers to purchase its hardware
products depend in part on the availability of third party software applications and services. There is no assurance that third party developers will continue to develop and maintain software applications and
services for the Company 146 s products. If third party software applications and services cease to be developed and maintained for the Company 146 s products, customers may choose not to buy the Company 146 s products.
With respect to its Mac products, the Company believes the availability of third party software applications and
services depends in part on the developers 146 perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining and upgrading such software for the Company 146 s products compared to Windows based products. This analysis may be based
on factors such as the market position of the Company and its products, the anticipated revenue that may be generated, expected future growth of Mac sales and the costs of developing such applications and services. If the Company 146 s minority
share of the global personal computer market causes developers to question the Mac 146 s prospects, developers could be less inclined to develop or upgrade software for the Company 146 s Mac products and more inclined to devote their resources to
developing and upgrading software for the larger Windows market. With respect to iOS devices, the Company relies on the continued availability and
development of compelling and innovative software applications, which are distributed through a single distribution channel, the App Store. iOS devices are subject to rapid technological change, and, if third party developers are unable to or choose
not to keep up with this pace of change, third party applications might not successfully operate and may result in dissatisfied customers. As with applications for the Company 146 s Mac products, the availability and development of these
applications also depend on developers 146 perceptions and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining or upgrading software for the Company 146 s iOS devices rather than its competitors 146 platforms, such as Android. If
developers focus their efforts on these competing platforms, the availability and quality of applications for the Company 146 s iOS devices may suffer.
The Company relies on access to third party intellectual property, which may not be available to the Company on commercially reasonable
terms or at all. Many of the Company 146 s products include third party intellectual property, which requires licenses from those third
parties. Based on past experience and industry practice, the Company believes such licenses generally can be obtained on reasonable terms. There is, however, no assurance that the necessary licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or at all.
Failure to obtain the right to use third party intellectual property, or to use such intellectual property on commercially reasonable terms, could preclude the Company from selling certain products or otherwise have a material adverse impact on the
Company 146 s financial condition and operating results. The Company could be impacted by unfavorable results of legal proceedings,
such as being found to have infringed on intellectual property rights. The Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that
have not yet been fully resolved and that have arisen in the ordinary course of business, and additional claims may arise in the future. For
example, technology companies, including many of the Company 146 s competitors, frequently enter into litigation based on allegations of patent infringement or other violations of intellectual property rights. In addition, patent holding companies
seek to monetize patents they have purchased or otherwise obtained. As the Company has grown, the intellectual property rights claims against it have increased and may continue to increase. In particular, the Company 146 s cellular enabled products
compete with products from mobile communication and media device companies that hold significant patent portfolios, and the number of patent claims against the Company has significantly increased.  The Company is vigorously defending
infringement actions in courts in a number of U.S. jurisdictions and before the U.S. International Trade Commission, as well as internationally in various countries. The plaintiffs in these actions frequently seek injunctions and substantial
damages. Regardless of the scope or validity of such patents or  other intellectual property rights, or the merits of any claims by potential or
actual litigants, the Company may have to engage in protracted litigation. If the Company is found to infringe one or more patents or other intellectual property rights, regardless of whether it can develop non infringing technology, it may be
required to pay substantial damages or royalties to a third party, or it may be subject to a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting the Company from marketing or selling certain products.
In certain cases, the Company may consider the desirability of entering into licensing agreements, although no assurance can be given that such licenses
can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. These licenses may also significantly increase the Company 146 s operating expenses.
Regardless of the merit of particular claims, litigation may be expensive, time consuming, disruptive to the
Company 146 s operations and distracting to management. In recognition of these considerations, the Company may enter into arrangements to settle litigation.
In management 146 s opinion, there is not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess
of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies, including matters related to infringement of intellectual property rights. However, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain.
Although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more legal matters were resolved against the Company in a
reporting period for amounts in excess of management 146 s expectations, the Company 146 s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Further, such an outcome could result in significant
compensatory, punitive or trebled monetary damages, disgorgement of revenue or profits, remedial corporate measures or injunctive relief against the Company that could materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results.
The Company is subject to laws and regulations worldwide, changes to which could increase the Company 146 s costs and individually or in
the aggregate adversely affect the Company 146 s business. The Company is subject to laws and regulations affecting its domestic and
international operations in a number of areas.  These U.S. and foreign laws and regulations affect the Company 146 s activities including, but not limited to, in areas of labor, advertising, digital content, consumer protection, real estate,
billing, e commerce, promotions, quality of services, telecommunications, mobile communications and media, television, intellectual property ownership and infringement, tax, import and export requirements, anti corruption, foreign exchange controls
and cash repatriation restrictions, data privacy requirements, anti competition, environmental, health and safety. By way of example, laws and
regulations related to mobile communications and media devices in the many jurisdictions in which the Company operates are extensive and subject to change. Such changes could include, among others, restrictions on the production, manufacture,
distribution and use of devices, locking devices to a carrier 146 s network, or mandating the use of devices on more than one carrier 146 s network. These devices are also subject to certification and regulation by governmental and standardization
bodies, as well as by cellular network carriers for use on their networks.  These certification processes are extensive and time consuming, and could result in additional testing requirements, product modifications, or delays in product shipment
dates, or could preclude the Company from selling certain products. Compliance with these laws, regulations and similar requirements may be onerous
and expensive, and they may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, further increasing the cost of compliance and doing business. Any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of changes in these laws and regulations or in
their interpretation, could individually or in the aggregate make the Company 146 s products and services less attractive to the Company 146 s customers, delay the introduction of new products in one or more regions, or cause the Company to change
or limit its business practices. The Company has implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance that the Company 146 s employees, contractors, or agents will not
violate such laws and regulations or the Company 146 s policies and procedures. The Company 146 s business is subject to the risks of
international operations. The Company derives a significant portion of its revenue and earnings from its international operations. Compliance
with applicable U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, such as import and export requirements, anti corruption laws, tax laws, foreign exchange controls and cash repatriation restrictions, data privacy requirements, environmental laws, labor laws
and anti competition regulations, increases the costs of doing business in foreign jurisdictions. Although the Company has implemented policies and procedures to comply with these laws and regulations, a violation by the Company 146 s employees,
contractors, or agents could nevertheless occur. Violations of these laws and regulations could materially adversely affect the Company 146 s brand, international growth efforts and business.
The Company also could be significantly affected by other risks associated with international activities including, but not limited to, economic and
labor conditions, increased duties, taxes and other costs and political instability. Margins on sales of the Company 146 s products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, could be
materially adversely affected by international trade regulations, including duties, tariffs and antidumping penalties. The Company is also exposed to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables with customers in certain international
markets. There can be no assurance the Company can effectively limit its credit risk and avoid losses.
The Company 146 s retail stores have required and will continue to require a substantial
investment and commitment of resources and are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. The Company 146 s retail stores have required
substantial investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory and personnel. The Company also has entered into substantial operating lease commitments for retail space. Certain stores have been designed and built to
serve as high profile venues to promote brand awareness and serve as vehicles for corporate sales and marketing activities. Because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment than the
Company 146 s more typical retail stores. Due to the high cost structure associated with the Company 146 s retail stores, a decline in sales or the closure or poor performance of individual or multiple stores could result in significant lease
termination costs, write offs of equipment and leasehold improvements and severance costs. Many factors unique to retail operations, some of which
are beyond the Company 146 s control, pose risks and uncertainties. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, macro economic factors that could have an adverse effect on general retail activity, as well as the Company 146 s
inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation, the Company 146 s failure to manage relationships with its existing retail partners, more challenging environments in managing retail operations outside the U.S., costs
associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of retail inventory, and the Company 146 s inability to obtain and renew leases in quality retail locations at a reasonable cost.
Investment in new business strategies and acquisitions could disrupt the Company 146 s ongoing business and present risks not originally
contemplated. The Company has invested, and in the future may invest, in new business strategies or acquisitions. Such endeavors may involve
significant risks and uncertainties, including distraction of management from current operations, greater than expected liabilities and expenses, inadequate return of capital and unidentified issues not discovered in the Company 146 s due
diligence. These new ventures are inherently risky and may not be successful. The Company 146 s business and reputation may be
impacted by information technology system failures or network disruptions. The Company may be subject to information technology system
failures and network disruptions. These may be caused by natural disasters, accidents, power disruptions, telecommunications failures, acts of terrorism or war, computer viruses, physical or electronic break ins, or other events or disruptions.
System redundancy may be ineffective or inadequate, and the Company 146 s disaster recovery planning may not be sufficient for all eventualities. Such failures or disruptions could, among other things, prevent access to the Company 146 s online
stores and services, preclude retail store transactions, compromise Company or customer data, and result in delayed or cancelled orders. System failures and disruptions could also impede the manufacturing and shipping of products, delivery of online
services, transactions processing and financial reporting. There may be breaches of the Company 146 s information technology systems
that materially damage business partner and customer relationships, curtail or otherwise adversely impact access to online stores and services, or subject the Company to significant reputational, financial, legal and operational consequences.
The Company 146 s business requires it to use and store customer, employee and business partner personally identifiable information
147 PII 148 . This may include, among other information, names, addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, contact preferences, tax identification numbers and payment account information. Although malicious attacks to gain access to PII affect
many companies across various industries, the Company is at a relatively greater risk of being targeted because of its high profile and the amount of PII it manages.
The Company requires user names and passwords in order to access its information technology systems. The Company also uses encryption and authentication
technologies designed to secure the transmission and storage of data and prevent access to Company data or accounts. As with all companies, these security measures are subject to third party security breaches, employee error, malfeasance, faulty
password management, or other irregularities. For example, third parties may attempt to fraudulently induce employees or customers into disclosing user names, passwords or other sensitive information, which may in turn be used to access the
Company 146 s information technology systems. To help protect customers and the Company, the Company monitors accounts and systems for unusual activity and may freeze accounts under suspicious circumstances, which may result in the delay or loss of
The Company devotes significant resources to network security, data encryption and other security measures
to protect its systems and data, but these security measures cannot provide absolute security. To the extent the Company was to experience a breach of its systems and was unable to protect sensitive data, such a breach could materially damage
business partner and customer relationships, and curtail or otherwise adversely impact access to online stores and services. Moreover, if a computer security breach affects the Company 146 s systems or results in the unauthorized release of PII,
the Company 146 s reputation and brand could be materially damaged, use of the Company 146 s products and services could decrease, and the Company could be exposed to a risk of loss or litigation and possible liability. While the Company maintains
insurance coverage that, subject to policy terms and conditions and subject to a significant self insured retention, is designed to address certain aspects of cyber risks, such insurance coverage may be insufficient to cover all losses or all types
of claims that may arise in the continually evolving area of cyber risk. The Company 146 s business is subject to a variety of U.S.
and international laws, rules, policies and other obligations regarding data protection. The Company is subject to federal, state and
international laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security and transfer of PII. In many cases, these laws apply not only to third party transactions, but also to transfers of information between the Company and its subsidiaries, and
among the Company, its subsidiaries and other parties with which the Company has commercial relations. Several jurisdictions have passed laws in this area, and other jurisdictions are considering imposing additional restrictions. These laws continue
to develop and may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Complying with emerging and changing international requirements may cause the Company to incur substantial costs or require the Company to change its business practices.
Noncompliance could result in penalties or significant legal liability. The Company 146 s privacy policy, which includes related practices
concerning the use and disclosure of data, is posted on its website. Any failure by the Company, its suppliers or other parties with whom the Company does business to comply with its posted privacy policy or with other federal, state or
international privacy related or data protection laws and regulations could result in proceedings against the Company by governmental entities or others.
The Company is also subject to payment card association rules and obligations under its contracts with payment card processors. Under these rules and
obligations, if information is compromised, the Company could be liable to payment card issuers for associated expenses and penalties. In addition, if the Company fails to follow payment card industry security standards, even if no customer
information is compromised, the Company could incur significant fines or experience a significant increase in payment card transaction costs.
The Company 146 s success depends largely on the continued service and availability of key personnel.
Much of the Company 146 s future success depends on the continued availability and service of key personnel, including its Chief Executive Officer,
executive team and other highly skilled employees. Experienced personnel in the technology industry are in high demand and competition for their talents is intense, especially in Silicon Valley, where most of the Company 146 s key personnel are
located. The Company 146 s business may be impacted by political events, war, terrorism, public health issues, natural disasters and
other business interruptions. War, terrorism, geopolitical uncertainties, public health issues and other business interruptions have caused
and could cause damage or disruption to international commerce and the global economy, and thus could have a material adverse effect on the Company, its suppliers, logistics providers, manufacturing vendors and customers, including channel partners.
The Company 146 s business operations are subject to interruption by, among others, natural disasters, whether as a result of climate change or otherwise, fire, power shortages, nuclear power plant accidents, terrorist attacks and other hostile
acts, labor disputes, public health issues and other events beyond its control. Such events could decrease demand for the Company 146 s products, make it difficult or impossible for the Company to make and deliver products to its customers,
including channel partners, or to receive components from its suppliers, and create delays and inefficiencies in the Company 146 s supply chain. Should major public health issues, including pandemics, arise, the Company could be adversely affected
by more stringent employee travel restrictions, additional limitations in freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of products between regions, delays in production ramps of new products and disruptions in the operations of the
Company 146 s manufacturing vendors and component suppliers. The majority of the Company 146 s R amp D activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology systems and other critical business operations, including certain component
suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are in locations that could be affected by natural disasters. In the event of a natural disaster, the Company could incur significant losses, require substantial recovery time and experience significant
The Company expects its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate.
The Company 146 s profit margins vary across its products and distribution channels. The Company 146 s software, accessories, and service and support
contracts generally have higher gross margins than certain of the Company 146 s other products. Gross margins on the Company 146 s hardware products vary across product lines and can change over time as a result of product transitions, pricing and
configuration changes, and component, warranty, and other cost fluctuations. The Company 146 s direct sales generally have higher associated gross margins than its indirect sales through its channel partners. In addition, the Company 146 s gross
margin and operating margin percentages, as well as overall profitability, may be materially adversely impacted as a result of a shift in product, geographic or channel mix, component cost increases, the strengthening U.S. dollar, price competition,
or the introduction of new products, including those that have higher cost structures with flat or reduced pricing. The Company has typically
experienced higher net sales in its first quarter compared to other quarters due in part to seasonal holiday demand. Additionally, new product introductions can significantly impact net sales, product costs and operating expenses. Further, the
Company generates a majority of its net sales from a single product and a decline in demand for that product could significantly impact quarterly net sales. The Company could also be subject to unexpected developments late in a quarter, such as
lower than anticipated demand for the Company 146 s products, issues with new product introductions, an internal systems failure, or failure of one of the Company 146 s logistics, components supply, or manufacturing partners.
The Company 146 s stock price is subject to volatility.
The Company 146 s stock price has experienced substantial price volatility in the past and may continue to do so in the future. Additionally, the
Company, the technology industry and the stock market as a whole have experienced extreme stock price and volume fluctuations that have affected stock prices in ways that may have been unrelated to these companies 146 operating performance. Price
volatility over a given period may cause the average price at which the Company repurchases its own stock to exceed the stock 146 s price at a given point in time. The Company believes its stock price should reflect expectations of future growth
and profitability. The Company also believes its stock price should reflect expectations that its cash dividend will continue at current levels or grow and that its current share repurchase program will be fully consummated. Future dividends are
subject to declaration by the Company 146 s Board of Directors, and the Company 146 s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. If the Company fails to meet expectations related to future growth,
profitability, dividends, share repurchases or other market expectations, its stock price may decline significantly, which could have a material adverse impact on investor confidence and employee retention.
The Company 146 s financial performance is subject to risks associated with changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus local
currencies. The Company 146 s primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relates to non U.S. dollar denominated sales
and operating expenses worldwide. Weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar adversely affects the U.S. dollar value of the Company 146 s foreign currency denominated sales and earnings, and generally leads the Company to raise
international pricing, potentially reducing demand for the Company 146 s products. Margins on sales of the Company 146 s products in foreign countries and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, could be
materially adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. In some circumstances, for competitive or other reasons, the Company may decide not to raise local prices to fully offset the dollar 146 s strengthening, or at all, which
would adversely affect the U.S. dollar value of the Company 146 s foreign currency denominated sales and earnings. Conversely, a strengthening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, while generally beneficial to the Company 146 s
foreign currency denominated sales and earnings, could cause the Company to reduce international pricing and incur losses on its foreign currency derivative instruments, thereby limiting the benefit. Additionally, strengthening of foreign currencies
may also increase the Company 146 s cost of product components denominated in those currencies, thus adversely affecting gross margins. The Company
uses derivative instruments, such as foreign currency forward and option contracts, to hedge certain exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. The use of such hedging activities may not offset any, or more than a portion, of the
adverse financial effects of unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates over the limited time the hedges are in place. The Company
is exposed to credit risk and fluctuations in the market values of its investment portfolio. Given the global nature of its business, the
Company has both domestic and international investments. Credit ratings and pricing of the Company 146 s investments can be negatively affected by liquidity, credit deterioration, financial results, economic risk, political risk, sovereign risk or
other factors. As a result, the value and liquidity of the Company 146 s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities may fluctuate substantially. Therefore, although the Company has not realized any significant losses on its cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities, future fluctuations in their value could result in a significant realized loss.
The Company is exposed to credit risk on its trade accounts receivable, vendor non trade
receivables and prepayments related to long term supply agreements, and this risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen.
The Company distributes its products through third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added resellers. The Company also
sells its products directly to small and mid sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. A substantial majority of the Company 146 s outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral, third party financing
arrangements or credit insurance. The Company 146 s exposure to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables is higher in certain international markets and its ability to mitigate such risks may be limited. The Company also has unsecured
vendor non trade receivables resulting from purchases of components by outsourcing partners and other vendors that manufacture sub assemblies or assemble final products for the Company. In addition, the Company has made prepayments associated with
long term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. As of September  26, 2015, a significant portion of the Company 146 s trade receivables was concentrated within cellular network carriers, and its vendor non trade
receivables and prepayments related to long term supply agreements were concentrated among a few individual vendors located primarily in Asia. While the Company has procedures to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on its trade and vendor
non trade receivables, as well as long term prepayments, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit its credit risk and avoid losses.
The Company could be subject to changes in its tax rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international tax legislation or exposure to
additional tax liabilities. The Company is subject to taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions, including Ireland, where a number
of the Company 146 s subsidiaries are organized. Due to economic and political conditions, tax rates in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change. The Company 146 s effective tax rates could be affected by changes in the mix of
earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, or changes in tax laws or their interpretation, including in the U.S. and Ireland. For example, in June 2014, the European
Commission opened a formal investigation of Ireland to examine whether decisions by the tax authorities with regard to the corporate income tax to be paid by two of the Company 146 s Irish subsidiaries comply with European Union rules on state aid.
If the European Commission were to conclude against Ireland, it could require Ireland to recover from the Company past taxes covering a period of up to 10 years reflective of the disallowed state aid, and such amount could be material.
The Company is also subject to the examination of its tax returns and other tax matters by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities and
governmental bodies. The Company regularly assesses the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of its provision for taxes. There can be no assurance as to the outcome of these examinations. If
the Company 146 s effective tax rates were to increase, particularly in the U.S. or Ireland, or if the ultimate determination of the Company 146 s taxes owed is for an amount in excess of amounts previously accrued, the Company 146 s financial
condition, operating results and cash flows could be adversely affected.
Properties The Company 146 s headquarters are located in Cupertino, California. As of
September  26, 2015, the Company owned or leased 25.6  million square feet of building space, primarily in the U.S. The Company also owned or leased building space in various locations, including throughout Europe, China, Singapore and
Japan. Of the total owned or leased building space 18.5  million square feet was leased building space, which includes approximately 5.3  million square feet related to retail store space. Additionally, the Company owns a total of 1,757
acres of land in various locations. As of September  26, 2015, the Company owned a manufacturing facility in Cork, Ireland that also housed a
customer support call center facilities in Elk Grove, California that included warehousing and distribution operations and a customer support call center and a facility in Mesa, Arizona. The Company also owned land in Austin, Texas where it is
expanding its existing office space and customer support call center. In addition, the Company owned facilities and land for R amp D and corporate functions in San Jose, California and Cupertino, California, including land that is being developed
for the Company 146 s second corporate campus. The Company also owned data centers in Newark, California Maiden, North Carolina Prineville, Oregon and Reno, Nevada. Outside the U.S., the Company owned additional facilities for various purposes.
The Company believes its existing facilities and equipment, which are used by all operating segments, are in good operating condition and are
suitable for the conduct of its business. The Company has invested in internal capacity and strategic relationships with outside manufacturing vendors and continues to make investments in capital equipment as needed to meet anticipated demand for
Legal Proceedings The Company is subject to the legal proceedings and claims discussed below as
well as certain other legal proceedings and claims that have not been fully resolved and that have arisen in the ordinary course of business. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred
a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant
uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management 146 s
expectations, the Company 146 s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. See the risk factor 147 The Company could be impacted by unfavorable results of legal proceedings, such as
being found to have infringed on intellectual property rights 148 in Part I, Item  1A of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Risk Factors. 148 The Company settled certain matters during the fourth quarter of 2015 that did not
individually or in the aggregate have a material impact on the Company 146 s financial condition or operating results. Apple eBooks
Antitrust Litigation United States of America v. Apple Inc., et al. On April  11, 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice filed a civil
antitrust action against the Company and five major book publishers in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, alleging an unreasonable restraint of interstate trade and commerce in violation of 167 1 of the Sherman Act and
seeking, among other things, injunctive relief, the District Court 146 s declaration that the Company 146 s agency agreements with the publishers are null and void and or the District Court 146 s reformation of such agreements. On July  10,
2013, the District Court found, following a bench trial, that the Company conspired to restrain trade in violation of 167 1 of the Sherman Act and relevant state statutes to the extent those laws are congruent with 167 1 of the Sherman
Act.  The District Court entered a permanent injunction, which took effect on October  6, 2013 and will be in effect for five years unless the judgment is overturned on appeal. The Company has taken the necessary steps to comply with the
terms of the District Court 146 s order, including renegotiating agreements with the five major eBook publishers, updating its antitrust training program and completing a two year monitorship with a court appointed antitrust compliance monitor,
whose appointment the District Court ended in October 2015. The Company appealed the District Court 146 s decision. Pursuant to a settlement agreement reached in June 2014, any damages the Company may be obligated to pay will be determined by the
outcome of the final adjudication following exhaustion of all appeals.
Market for Registrant 146 s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The Company 146 s common stock is traded on the NASDAQ Stock Market LLC 147 NASDAQ 148 under the symbol AAPL.
Price Range of Common Stock The price range per share of
common stock presented below represents the highest and lowest intraday sales prices for the Company 146 s common stock on the NASDAQ during each quarter of the two most recent years.
2015, there were 25,924 shareholders of record. Dividends
The Company paid a total of 11.4 billion and 11.0 billion in dividends during 2015 and 2014, respectively, and expects to pay quarterly dividends of
0.52 per common share each quarter, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. The Company also plans to increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors.
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Share repurchase activity during the three months ended September  26, 2015 was as follows in millions, except number of shares, which are reflected
Total  Numberof SharesPurchasedas Part ofPubliclyAnnouncedPlans
ApproximateDollar  Value  ofShares ThatMay Yet BePurchasedUnder thePlans
In 2012, the Company 146 s Board of Directors authorized a program to repurchase up to 10 billion of the Company 146 s common stock beginning in 2013. The
Company 146 s Board of Directors increased the authorization to repurchase the Company 146 s common stock to 60 billion in April 2013, to 90 billion in April 2014 and to 140 billion in April 2015. As of September  26, 2015, 104 billion of
the 140 billion had been utilized. The  remaining 36 billion in the table represents the amount available to repurchase shares under the authorized repurchase program as of September  26, 2015. The Company 146 s share repurchase program
does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated and or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5 1 under the Exchange Act.
In May 2015, the Company entered into an accelerated share repurchase arrangement 147 ASR 148 to purchase up to 6.0 billion of the Company 146 s
common stock. In July 2015, the purchase period for this ASR ended and an additional 10.0  million shares were delivered and retired. In total, 48.3  million net shares were delivered under this ASR at an average repurchase price of 124.24.
The following graph shows a comparison of cumulative total shareholder return, calculated on a dividend reinvested basis, for the Company, the S amp P 500
Index, the S amp P Information Technology Index and the Dow Jones U.S. Technology Supersector Index for the five years ended September  26, 2015. The graph assumes 100 was invested in each of the Company 146 s common stock, the S amp P 500
Index, the S amp P Information Technology Index and the Dow Jones U.S. Technology Supersector Index as of the market close on September  24, 2010. Note that historic stock price performance is not necessarily indicative of future stock price
100 invested on 9 25 10 in stock or index, including reinvestment of dividends. Data points are the last day of each fiscal year for the Company 146 s
S amp P, a division of McGraw Hill Financial. All rights reserved. Copyright SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top copy 2015 Dow Jones amp Co. All rights reserved.
Selected Financial Data The information set forth below for the five years ended
September  26, 2015, is not necessarily indicative of results of future operations, and should be read in conjunction with Part II, Item  7, 147 Management 146 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations 148 and the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K to fully understand factors that may affect the comparability of the
information presented below in  millions, except number of shares, which are reflected in thousands, and per share amounts .
Total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
Other long term obligations exclude non current deferred revenue.
Includes current and long term portion of term debt.
Management 146 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This
section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10 K 147 Form 10 K 148 contain forward looking statements, within the
meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not
directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward looking statements can also be identified by words such as 147 future, 148 147 anticipates, 148 147 believes, 148 147 estimates, 148 147 expects, 148 147 intends, 148
147 plans, 148 147 predicts, 148 147 will, 148 147 would, 148 147 could, 148 147 can, 148 147 may, 148 and similar terms. Forward looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company 146 s actual
results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item  1A
of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Risk Factors, 148 which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II,
Item  8 of this Form 10 K. All information presented herein is based on the Company 146 s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the
Company 146 s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the 147 Company 148 and 147 Apple 148 as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its
wholly owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and
markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third party digital content and applications. The Company
sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of
third party Apple compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers.
billion during 2015 compared to 2014, driven by a 52 year over year increase in iPhone reg net sales. iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2015 increased in all of the Company 146 s reportable
operating segments. The Company also experienced year over year net sales increases in Mac reg , Services and Other Products. Apple Watch reg ,
which launched during the third quarter of 2015, accounted for more than 100 of the year over year growth in net sales of Other Products. Net sales growth during 2015 was partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar and lower iPad reg net sales. Total net sales increased in each of the Company 146 s reportable operating segments, with particularly strong growth in Greater China
where year over year net sales increased 84 . In April 2015, the Company announced a significant increase to its capital return program by raising
the expected total size of the program to 200 billion through March 2017. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization to 140 billion and raising its quarterly dividend to 0.52 per share beginning in May 2015. During 2015, the
Company spent 36.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of 11.6 billion. Additionally, the Company issued 14.5 billion of U.S. dollar denominated,
128 4.8 billion of euro denominated, SFr1.3 billion of Swiss franc denominated, pound 1.3 billion of British pound denominated, A 2.3 billion of Australian dollar denominated and yen 250.0 billion
of Japanese yen denominated term debt during 2015. Fiscal 2014 Highlights
Net sales rose 7 or 11.9 billion during 2014 compared to 2013. This was driven by increases in net sales of iPhone, Mac and Services. Net sales and unit
sales increased for iPhone primarily due to the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in the fourth quarter of 2014, and expanded distribution.
Mac net sales and unit sales increased primarily due to strong demand for MacBook Air reg and MacBook Pro reg which were updated in 2014 with
faster processors and offered at lower prices. Net sales of Services grew primarily due to increased revenue from sales through the App Store reg , AppleCare SUP
STYLE font size 85 vertical align top reg and licensing. Growth in these areas was partially offset by the year over year decline in net sales for iPad due to lower unit sales in many markets, and a decline in net sales of Other
Products. All of the Company 146 s operating segments other than the Rest of Asia Pacific segment experienced increased net sales in 2014, with growth being strongest in the Greater China and Japan operating segments.
During 2014, the Company completed various business acquisitions, including the acquisitions of Beats Music, LLC, which offers a subscription streaming
music service, and Beats Electronics, LLC, which makes Beats reg headphones, speakers and audio software.
In April 2014, the Company increased its share repurchase authorization to 90 billion and the quarterly
dividend was raised to 0.47 per common share, resulting in an overall increase in its capital return program from 100 billion to over 130 billion. During 2014, the Company utilized 45 billion to repurchase its common stock and paid dividends and
dividend equivalents of 11.1 billion. The Company also issued 12.0 billion of long term debt during 2014, with varying maturities through 2044, and launched a commercial paper program, with 6.3 billion outstanding as of September  27, 2014.
Sales Data The following table shows net sales by
operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions and units in thousands
Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non software services.
Includes revenue from the iTunes Store reg , App Store, Mac App Store, iBooks Store 153 and Apple
Music 153 collectively 147 Internet Services 148 , AppleCare, Apple Pay reg , licensing and other services.
Includes sales of Apple TV reg , Apple Watch, Beats products, iPod and Apple branded and third party
The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions and units in thousands
The year over year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2015 primarily resulted from strong demand for iPhone
6 and 6 Plus during 2015. Overall average selling prices 147 ASPs 148 for iPhone increased by 11 during 2015 compared to 2014, due primarily to the introduction of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, partially offset by the effect of
weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year over year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2014 resulted
primarily from the successful introduction of new iPhones in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in September 2014, and expanded distribution. iPhone unit sales grew in all of the
Company 146 s operating segments, while iPhone net sales grew in all segments except Rest of Asia Pacific. Overall ASPs for iPhone were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013, with growth in ASPs in the Americas segment being offset by a decline
in ASPs in the Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific segments. iPad
The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions and units in thousands
Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined during 2015 compared to 2014. The Company believes the decline in iPad sales
is due in part to a longer repurchase cycle for iPads and some level of cannibalization from the Company 146 s other products. iPad ASPs declined by 5 during 2015 compared to 2014, primarily as a result of the effect of weakness in most foreign
currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a shift in mix to lower priced iPads. Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined in 2014 compared to
2013. iPad net sales and unit sales grew in the Greater China and Japan segments but this growth was more than offset by a decline in all other segments. Overall iPad ASPs were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013 with a shift in mix to
higher priced iPads being offset by the October 2013 price reduction of iPad mini 153 . ASPs increased in the Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific segments but were slightly down in other segments.
Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales
information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions and units in thousands
The year over year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales during 2015 was driven by strong demand for Mac portables. Mac
ASPs declined 3 during 2015 compared to 2014 largely due to the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The
year over year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales for 2014 was primarily driven by increased sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro. Mac net sales and unit sales increased in all of the Company 146 s operating segments. Mac ASPs
decreased during 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to price reductions on certain Mac models and a shift in mix towards Mac portable systems.
presents net sales information of Services for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
The increase in net sales of Services during 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to growth from Internet Services and
licensing. The App Store, included within Internet Services, generated strong year over year net sales growth of 29 . The increase in net sales of
Services in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to growth in net sales from Internet Services, AppleCare and licensing. Internet Services generated a total of 10.2 billion in net sales during 2014 compared to 9.3 billion during 2013. Growth in
net sales from Internet Services was driven by increases in revenue from app sales reflecting continued growth in the installed base of iOS devices and the expanded offerings of iOS apps and related in app purchases. This was partially offset by a
decline in sales of digital music. Segment Operating Performance
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company 146 s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe,
Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong
Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company 146 s other reportable operating segments. Although, each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software
products and similar services, they are managed separately to better align with the location of the Company 146 s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the
Company 146 s reportable operating segments can be found in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, 147 Segment Information and Geographic Data. 148
Americas The following table presents Americas net sales
information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
The year over year growth in Americas net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of
iPhone, partially offset by a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. The growth in the Americas segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales
of iPhone, Mac and Services that was partially offset by a decline in net sales of iPad and Other Products and weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar compared to 2013. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful
introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air and Mac Pro.
Europe The following table presents Europe net sales
information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
The year over year increase in Europe net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of
iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad.
The growth in the Europe segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales of iPhone, Mac and Services, as well as strength in European currencies relative
to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a decline in net sales of iPad. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the second half of calendar 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in
over 20 countries in Europe in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro.
following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
Greater China experienced strong year over year increases in net sales during 2015 driven primarily by iPhone sales.
The Greater China segment experienced year over year growth in net sales in 2014 that was significantly higher than the growth rate for the Company
overall. Greater China growth was driven by higher unit sales and net sales of all major product categories, in addition to higher net sales of Services. Growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone was especially strong, driven by the successful
launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in Mainland China and Hong Kong in September 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in Hong Kong in September 2014, increased demand for the Company 146 s entry priced iPhones and the addition of a significant
new carrier in the second quarter of 2014. Japan The
following table presents Japan net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
The year over year increase in Japan net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in Services largely associated
with strong App Store sales, partially offset by the effect of weakness in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. In 2014 the Japan segment
generated year over year increases in net sales and unit sales of every major product category and experienced growth in net sales of Services. The year over year growth in iPhone was driven by the successful launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in September
2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, increased demand for the Company 146 s entry priced iPhones and the addition of a significant new carrier in the fourth quarter of 2013. These positive factors were partially
offset by weakness in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific
The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 dollars in millions
The year over year increase in Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2015 primarily reflects strong growth in net sales
and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad.
Net sales in the Rest of Asia Pacific segment declined in 2014 compared to 2013 due to year over year reductions in net sales in all major product
categories except Mac and reductions in unit sales of iPad. Net sales in 2014 were also negatively affected by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, including the Australian dollar.
Gross margin for 2015, 2014 and 2013 is as follows dollars in millions
The year over year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2015 was driven primarily by a favorable shift in mix to
products with higher margins and, to a lesser extent, by improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. These positive factors were partially offset primarily by higher product cost structures and, to a lesser extent, by the effect of
weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year over year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2014 was driven by
multiple factors including lower commodity costs, a favorable shift in mix to products with higher margins and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales, which was partially offset by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative
to the U.S. dollar, price reductions on select products and higher cost structures on certain new products. The Company anticipates gross margin
during the first quarter of 2016 to be between 39 and 40 . The foregoing statement regarding the Company 146 s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2016 is forward looking and could differ from actual results. The
Company 146 s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item  1A of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Risk Factors 148 and those described in this paragraph. In
general, the Company believes gross margins will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product
transitions, potential increases in the cost of components, and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company 146 s sales mix towards
products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company 146 s
ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company 146 s significant international operations, its financial condition and operating results, including gross
margins, could be significantly affected by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows dollars in millions
year over year growth in R amp D expense in 2015 and 2014 was driven primarily by an increase in headcount and related expenses, including share based compensation costs, and material costs to support expanded R amp D activities. The Company
continues to believe that focused investments in R amp D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and updated products that are central to the Company 146 s
core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative
The year over year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2015 and 2014 was primarily due to increased headcount and related expenses,
including share based compensation costs, and higher spending on marketing and advertising.
Other income expense , net for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows dollars in millions
The increase in other income expense , net during 2015 compared to 2014 was due primarily to higher interest income,
partially offset by higher expenses associated with foreign exchange activity and higher interest expense on debt. The decrease in other income and expense during 2014 compared to 2013 was due primarily to higher interest expense on debt and higher
expenses associated with foreign exchange rate movements, partially offset by lower premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts and higher interest income. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and
marketable securities was 1.49 , 1.11 and 1.03 in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows dollars in millions
The Company 146 s effective tax rates for 2015, 2014 and 2013 differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35
due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided when such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside
the U.S. The higher effective tax rate during 2015 compared to 2014 was due primarily to higher foreign taxes. The effective tax rate in 2014 compared to 2013 was relatively flat.
As of September  26, 2015, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of 7.8
billion and deferred tax liabilities of 24.1 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of
existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation
allowance. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service is currently examining the years 2010 through 2012, and all years prior to 2010 are closed. In
addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local and foreign tax authorities.  In major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 2003 generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing
authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company 146 s
tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management 146 s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs.
On June  11, 2014, the European Commission issued an opening decision initiating a formal investigation against Ireland for alleged state aid to the
Company. The opening decision concerns the allocation of profits for taxation purposes of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company. The Company believes the European Commission 146 s assertions are without merit. If the European
Commission were to conclude against Ireland, the European Commission could require Ireland to recover from the Company past taxes covering a period of up to 10 years reflective of the disallowed state aid. While such amount could be material, as of
September  26, 2015 the Company is unable to estimate the impact.
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board 147 FASB 148 issued Accounting Standards Update 147 ASU 148 No.  2014 09, Revenue
from Contracts with Customers Topic 606 147 ASU 2014 09 148 , which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014 09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to
be entitled when products are transferred to customers. The original effective date for ASU 2014 09 would have required the Company to adopt
beginning in its first quarter of 2018. In August 2015, the FASB issued ASU No.  2015 14, Revenue from Contracts with Customers Topic 606 150 Deferral of the Effective Date, which defers the effective date of ASU 2014 09 for one year and
permits early adoption as early as the original effective date of ASU 2014 09. Accordingly, the Company may adopt the standard in either its first quarter of 2018 or 2019. The new revenue standard may be applied retrospectively to each prior period
presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company is currently evaluating the timing of its adoption and the impact of adopting the new revenue standard on its consolidated financial
statements. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following
table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September  26, 2015, September  27, 2014 and September  28, 2013 in millions
The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to
satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future
dividends, the share repurchase program and debt repayments will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from on going U.S. operating activities and from borrowings.
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the Company 146 s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by foreign
subsidiaries were 186.9 billion and 137.1 billion, respectively, and are generally based in U.S. dollar denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income
taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company 146 s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The
policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2015,
cash generated from operating activities of 81.3 billion was a result of 53.4 billion of net income, non cash adjustments to net income of 16.2 billion and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of 11.7 billion. Cash
used in investing activities of 56.3 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of 44.4 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of 11.2 billion.
Cash used in financing activities of 17.7 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of 35.3 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of 11.6 billion, partially offset by net proceeds
from the issuance of term debt of 27.1 billion. During 2014, cash generated from operating activities of 59.7 billion was a result of 39.5
billion of net income, non cash adjustments to net income of 13.2 billion and an increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities of 7.0 billion. Cash used in investing activities of 22.6 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash
used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of 9.0 billion cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of 9.6 billion and cash paid for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of 3.8 billion. Cash used
in financing activities of 37.5 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of 45.0 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of 11.1 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the
issuance of term debt and commercial paper of 12.0 billion and 6.3 billion, respectively.
The Company 146 s capital expenditures were 11.2 billion during 2015. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately 15.0 billion for capital
expenditures during 2016, which includes product tooling and manufacturing process equipment data centers corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements and retail store facilities.
Debt In 2014, the Board of Directors authorized the Company to
issue unsecured short term promissory notes 147 Commercial Paper 148 pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and
share repurchases. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had 8.5 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted average interest rate of 0.14 and maturities generally less than nine months.
As of September  26, 2015, the Company has outstanding floating and fixed rate notes for an aggregate principal amount of 55.7 billion
collectively the 147 Notes 148 . The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into currency swaps to
manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. The future principal payments for the Company 146 s Notes as of September  26, 2015 are as follows in millions
Further information regarding the Company 146 s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II,
Item  8 of this Form 10 K in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 2, 147 Financial Instruments 148 and Note 6, 147 Debt. 148
Capital Return Program In April 2015, the Company 146 s Board
of Directors increased the share repurchase program authorization from 90 billion to 140 billion of the Company 146 s common stock, increasing the expected total size of the capital return program to 200 billion. The Company expects to execute
the capital return program by the end of March 2017 by paying dividends and dividend equivalents, repurchasing shares and remitting withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units. To assist in funding its capital return
program, the Company expects to continue to access the debt markets, both domestically and internationally. As of September  26, 2015, 104 billion of the share repurchase program has been utilized. The Company 146 s share repurchase program
does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5 1 under the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended. In April 2015, the Company 146 s Board of Directors raised the quarterly cash dividend by 11 . The Company plans to increase its
dividend on an annual basis subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. The following table presents the Company 146 s dividends, dividend
equivalents, share repurchases and net share settlement activity from the start of the capital return program in August 2012 through September  26, 2015 in millions
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained
interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing,
liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging, or R amp D services with the Company. The following
table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September  26, 2015, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt in
Company 146 s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi year renewal options. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had a total of 463 retail stores. Leases for retail space are for terms
ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi year renewal options. As of September  26, 2015, the Company 146 s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were 6.3
billion, of which 3.6 billion related to leases for retail space. Purchase Commitments
The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub assemblies for the Company 146 s products and to perform final assembly and testing
of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products
from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Where
appropriate,  the  purchases are applied to  inventory component prepayments  that are  outstanding with the  respective supplier. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had outstanding off balance sheet third party
manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of 29.5 billion. Other Obligations
The Company 146 s other off balance sheet obligations were comprised of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and
manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to inventory prepayments, advertising, licensing, R amp D, internet and telecommunications services, energy and other obligations.
The Company 146 s other non current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax
benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had non current deferred tax liabilities of 24.1 billion. Additionally, as of September  26, 2015, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits
of 6.9 billion and an additional 1.3 billion for gross interest and penalties classified as non current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in
connection with these tax liabilities therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification
The Company generally does not indemnify end users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes
third party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the
Company or an indemnified third party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end users of its operating system or application
software for infringement of third party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September  26, 2015 or September  27, 2014.
In September 2015, the Company introduced the iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who
purchase an iPhone 6s and 6s Plus in one of its U.S. physical retail stores and activate the purchased iPhone with one of the four national carriers. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a new iPhone,
provided certain conditions are met. One of the conditions of this program requires the customer to finance the initial purchase price of the iPhone with a third party lender. Upon exercise of the trade in right and purchase of a new iPhone, the
Company satisfies the customer 146 s outstanding balance due to the third party lender on the original device. The Company accounts for the trade in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such
right with subsequent changes to the guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its
directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance
expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of
prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of
financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles 147 GAAP 148 and the Company 146 s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the
Company 146 s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, 147 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, 148 of the Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company 146 s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on
historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from
these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company 146 s critical accounting policies and estimates are those
related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and valuation of manufacturing related assets and estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and
other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about
inherently uncertain matters. The Company 146 s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company 146 s Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue
from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed
or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company 146 s product sales, these criteria
are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company
retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of the Company 146 s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price
is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the
functionality of the hardware and third party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting
guidance for the following types of sales transactions i  standalone sales of software products, ii  sales of software upgrades and iii  sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware.
For multi element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product 146 s functionality,
undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product 146 s essential software and or undelivered non software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances,
the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables i  vendor specific objective evidence of fair value 147 VSOE 148 , ii  third party evidence of selling price
147 TPE 148 and iii  best estimate of selling price 147 ESP 148 . VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the
Company 146 s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand alone basis.
For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it
may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device 146 s essential software and or non software services free of charge. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the
non software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company 146 s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non software services based on the Company 146 s ESPs is deferred and
recognized on a straight line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non software services are expected to be provided. The
Company 146 s process for determining ESPs involves management 146 s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and
circumstances change, the Company 146 s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for unspecified software upgrades and non software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the
unspecified software upgrade rights and non software services offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights and non software services and the estimated period unspecified software upgrades and non software services are expected
to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive
programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition
have been met. The Company 146 s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company 146 s other customer incentive programs,
the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the
Company 146 s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive
programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management 146 s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a
greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company 146 s operating results.
Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The
Company 146 s investments in available for sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the
Company 146 s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available for sale securities impact the Company 146 s net income only when such securities are sold or an other than temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and
losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security 146 s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other than temporarily impaired, which would
require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost
the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto and the Company 146 s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company 146 s
assessment on whether a security is other than temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security, which would have an adverse impact on the Company 146 s operating
results. Inventory Valuation and Valuation of Manufacturing Related Assets and Estimated Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees
The Company must purchase components and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing related assets, including
capital assets held at its suppliers 146 facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write down
for inventories of components and products, including third party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory that considers
multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing related capital assets and inventory prepayments for
impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value
of such an asset exceeds its fair value. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and
component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write downs of inventory and or manufacturing related assets. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the
Company 146 s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company 146 s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the
financial condition of one or more of the Company 146 s suppliers that hold any of the Company 146 s manufacturing related assets or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write downs would adversely affect the Company 146 s
financial condition and operating results in the period when the write downs were recorded.
The Company accrues for estimated cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been cancelled or
are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders in each case based on projected demand. Where appropriate, the purchases
are applied to  inventory component prepayments  that are  outstanding with the  respective supplier. Purchase commitments typically cover the Company 146 s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150
days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company 146 s products, a change in the Company 146 s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the
Company 146 s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded.
Warranty Costs The Company accrues for the estimated cost of
warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost per claim and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company 146 s typical
experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities or the current installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product
failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results.
Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the
anticipated tax consequences of its reported operating results. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences
of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that
apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than
not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will
be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than
50 likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income
that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all
or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax
liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management 146 s expectations could have a material
impact on the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies
As discussed in Part I, Item  3 of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Legal Proceedings 148 and in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K in the
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, 147 Commitments and Contingencies, 148 the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it
is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management,
there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the outcome of legal
proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the
Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management 146 s expectations, the Company 146 s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Interest Rate and Foreign Currency Risk Management
The Company regularly reviews its foreign exchange forward and option positions and interest rate swaps, both on a
stand alone basis and in conjunction with its underlying foreign currency and interest rate related exposures. Given the effective horizons of the Company 146 s risk management activities and the anticipatory
nature of the exposures, there can be no assurance these positions will offset more than a portion of the financial impact resulting from movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. Further, the recognition of the gains and losses
related to these instruments may not coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic exposures and, therefore, may adversely affect the Company 146 s financial condition and operating results.
Interest Rate Risk The Company 146 s exposure to changes in
interest rates relates primarily to the Company 146 s investment portfolio and outstanding debt. While the Company is exposed to global interest rate fluctuations, the Company 146 s interest income and expense are most sensitive to fluctuations in
U.S. interest rates. Changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company 146 s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and the fair value of those securities, as well as costs associated with hedging and interest paid
on the Company 146 s debt. The Company 146 s investment policy and strategy are focused on preservation of capital and supporting the
Company 146 s liquidity requirements. The Company uses a combination of internal and external management to execute its investment strategy and achieve its investment objectives. The Company typically invests in highly rated securities, and its
investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. To provide a
meaningful assessment of the interest rate risk associated with the Company 146 s investment portfolio, the Company performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact a change in interest rates would have on the value of the investment
portfolio assuming a 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve. Based on investment positions as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, a hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates across all maturities would
result in a 4.3 billion and 3.4 billion incremental decline in the fair market value of the portfolio, respectively. Such losses would only be realized if the Company sold the investments prior to maturity.
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the Company had outstanding floating and fixed rate notes with varying maturities for an
aggregate carrying amount of 56.0 billion and 29.0 billion, respectively. The Company has entered, and may enter in the future, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on its outstanding term debt. Interest rate swaps allow the
Company to effectively convert fixed rate payments into floating rate payments or floating rate payments into fixed rate payments. Gains and losses on these instruments are generally offset by the corresponding losses and gains on the related
hedging instrument. A 100 basis point increase in market interest rates would cause interest expense on the Company 146 s debt as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014 to increase by 200 million and 110 million on an annualized
basis, respectively. Further details regarding the Company 146 s debt is provided in Part II, Item  8 of this Form FONT
STYLE white space nowrap 10 K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 6, 147 Debt. 148 Foreign Currency Risk
In general, the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a
strengthening of the U.S. dollar, will negatively affect the Company 146 s net sales and gross margins as expressed in U.S. dollars. There is a risk that the Company will have to adjust local currency product pricing due to competitive pressures
when there have been significant volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. The Company may enter into foreign currency forward and option
contracts with financial institutions to protect against foreign exchange risks associated with certain existing assets and liabilities, certain firmly committed transactions, forecasted future cash flows and net investments in foreign subsidiaries.
In addition, the Company has entered, and may enter in the future, into non designated foreign currency contracts to partially offset the foreign currency exchange gains and losses on its foreign denominated debt issuances. The Company 146 s
practice is to hedge a portion of its material foreign exchange exposures, typically for up to 12 months. However, the Company may choose not to hedge certain foreign exchange exposures for a variety of reasons, including but not limited to
accounting considerations and the prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures.
To provide a meaningful assessment of the foreign currency risk associated with certain of the
Company 146 s foreign currency derivative positions, the Company performed a sensitivity analysis using a value at risk 147 VAR 148 model to assess the potential impact of fluctuations in exchange rates. The VAR model consisted of using a
Monte Carlo simulation to generate thousands of random market price paths assuming normal market conditions. The VAR is the maximum expected loss in fair value, for a given confidence interval, to the Company 146 s foreign currency derivative
positions due to adverse movements in rates. The VAR model is not intended to represent actual losses but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. The model assumes normal market conditions. Forecasted transactions, firm commitments and
assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies were excluded from the model. Based on the results of the model, the Company estimates with 95 confidence a maximum one day loss in fair value of 342 million as of September  26, 2015
compared to a maximum one day loss in fair value of 240 million as of September  27, 2014. Because the Company uses foreign currency instruments for hedging purposes, the loss in fair value incurred on those instruments are generally offset by
increases in the fair value of the underlying exposures. Actual future gains and losses associated with the Company 146 s investment portfolio and
derivative positions may differ materially from the sensitivity analyses performed as of September  26, 2015 due to the inherent limitations associated with predicting the timing and amount of changes in interest rates, foreign currency
exchanges rates and the Company 146 s actual exposures and positions.
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended September  26, 2015, September
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended September  26, 2015, September
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders 146 Equity for the years ended September  26, 2015, September
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended September  26, 2015, September
Selected Quarterly Financial Information Unaudited
Reports of Ernst  amp Young LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
All financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable or is not present
in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
In  millions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands and per share amounts
See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Change in foreign currency translation, net of tax effects of 201, 50 and 35, respectively
Change in unrealized gains losses on derivative instruments
Change in fair value of derivatives, net of tax benefit expense of 441 , 297 and 351 , respectively
Adjustment for net gains losses realized and included in net income, net of tax expense benefit of 630, 36 and 255, respectively
Total change in unrealized gains losses on derivative instruments, net of  tax
Change in unrealized gains losses on marketable securities
Change in fair value of marketable securities, net of tax benefit expense of 264, 153 and 458, respectively
Adjustment for net gains losses realized and included in net income, net of tax expense benefit of 32 , 71 and 82, respectively
Total change in unrealized gains losses on marketable securities, net of tax
See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In millions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands and par value
Accounts receivable, less allowances of 82 and 86, respectively
Common stock and additional paid in capital, 0.00001 par value 12,600,000 shares authorized 5,578,753 and 5,866,161 shares issued and
See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS 146 EQUITY
In  millions, except number of shares which are reflected in thousands
Common stock issued, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
Tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
Common stock issued, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
Tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
Common stock issued, net of shares withheld for employee taxes
Tax benefit from equity awards, including transfer pricing adjustments
See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash generated by operating activities
Proceeds from maturities of marketable securities
Payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net
Payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment
Taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards
See accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Note 1 150 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Apple Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries collectively 147 Apple 148 or the 147 Company 148 designs, manufactures and
markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third party digital content and applications. The Company
sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of
third party Apple compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company. Intercompany accounts and transactions have
been eliminated. In the opinion of the Company 146 s management, the consolidated financial statements reflect all adjustments, which are normal and recurring in nature, necessary for fair financial statement presentation. The preparation of these
consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles 147 GAAP 148 requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in these consolidated financial statements
and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. The Company 146 s fiscal year is the 52 or 53 week period that
ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company 146 s fiscal years 2015, 2014 and 2013 ended on September  26, 2015,  September  27, 2014 and September  28, 2013, respectively. An additional week is included in the first fiscal
quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. Fiscal years 2015, 2014 and 2013 each spanned 52 weeks. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months and periods refer to the
Company 146 s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service
and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once
it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company 146 s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to
education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of
the Company 146 s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on
comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance
with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions i  standalone sales of software products,
ii  sales of software upgrades and iii  sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For
the sale of most third party products, the Company recognizes revenue based on the gross amount billed to customers because the Company establishes its own pricing for such products, retains related inventory risk for physical products, is the
primary obligor to the customer and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its customers. For third party applications sold through the App Store and Mac App Store and certain digital content sold through the iTunes Store, the Company does
not determine the selling price of the products and is not the primary obligor to the customer. Therefore, the Company accounts for such sales on a net basis by recognizing in net sales only the commission it retains from each sale. The portion of
the gross amount billed to customers that is remitted by the Company to third party app developers and certain digital content owners is not reflected in the Company 146 s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The Company records deferred revenue when it receives payments in advance of the delivery of products or the
performance of services. This includes amounts that have been deferred for unspecified and specified software upgrade rights and non software services that are attached to hardware and software products. The Company sells gift cards redeemable at
its retail and online stores, and also sells gift cards redeemable on iTunes Store, App Store, Mac App Store and iBooks Store for the purchase of digital content and software. The Company records deferred revenue upon the sale of the card, which is
relieved upon redemption of the card by the customer. Revenue from AppleCare service and support contracts is deferred and recognized over the service coverage periods. AppleCare service and support contracts typically include extended phone
support, repair services, web based support resources and diagnostic tools offered under the Company 146 s standard limited warranty. The Company
records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded. For
the Company 146 s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records
reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company 146 s historical experience. Revenue is recorded net of taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental authorities, with the collected taxes recorded
as current liabilities until remitted to the relevant government authority. Revenue Recognition for Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables
For multi element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product 146 s functionality, undelivered
software elements that relate to the hardware product 146 s essential software, and undelivered non software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses
a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables i  vendor specific objective evidence of fair value 147 VSOE 148 , ii  third party evidence of selling price 147 TPE 148 and
iii  best estimate of selling price 147 ESP 148 . VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company 146 s best
estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand alone basis. For multi element arrangements accounted for in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance, the Company allocates
revenue to all deliverables based on the VSOE of each element, and if VSOE does not exist revenue is recognized when elements lacking VSOE are delivered.
For sales of qualifying versions of iPhone, iPad and iPod touch 147 iOS devices 148 , Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it
may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device 146 s essential software and or non software services free of charge. The Company has identified up to three deliverables regularly included in arrangements involving
the sale of these devices. The first deliverable, which represents the substantial portion of the allocated sales price, is the hardware and software essential to the functionality of the hardware device delivered at the time of sale. The second
deliverable is the embedded right included with qualifying devices to receive on a when and if available basis, future unspecified software upgrades relating to the product 146 s essential software. The third deliverable is the non software
services to be provided to qualifying devices. The Company allocates revenue between these deliverables using the relative selling price method. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for these deliverables, the allocation of revenue is based
on the Company 146 s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the delivered hardware and the related essential software is recognized at the time of sale provided the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. Revenue allocated to the embedded
unspecified software upgrade rights and the non software services is deferred and recognized on a straight line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non software services are expected to be provided. Cost of sales related to
delivered hardware and related essential software, including estimated warranty costs, are recognized at the time of sale. Costs incurred to provide non software services are recognized as cost of sales as incurred, and engineering and sales and
marketing costs are recognized as operating expenses as incurred. The Company 146 s process for determining its ESP for deliverables without VSOE
or TPE considers multiple factors that may vary depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable including, where applicable, prices charged by the Company and market trends in the pricing for similar offerings, product
specific business objectives, length of time a particular version of a device has been available, estimated cost to provide the non software services and the relative ESP of the upgrade rights and non software services as compared to the total
selling price of the product. Beginning in September 2015, the Company reduced the combined ESPs for iOS devices and Mac between 5 and 10 to
reflect the increase in competitive offers for similar products at little to no cost for users, which reduces the amount the Company could reasonably charge for these deliverables on a standalone basis.
Shipping Costs Amounts billed to customers related to shipping
and handling are classified as revenue, and the Company 146 s shipping and handling costs are classified as cost of sales.
The Company generally provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized. The Company
assesses the adequacy of its accrued warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual experience and changes in future estimates.
Software Development Costs Research and development
147 R amp D 148 costs are expensed as incurred. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning when a product 146 s technological feasibility has been established and
ending when a product is available for general release to customers. In most instances, the Company 146 s products are released soon after technological feasibility has been established and as a result software development costs were expensed as
expensed as incurred and included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Advertising expense was 1.8 billion, 1.2 billion and 1.1 billion for 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Share based Compensation The Company recognizes expense
related to share based payment transactions in which it receives employee services in exchange for a  equity instruments of the Company or b  liabilities that are based on the fair value of the Company 146 s equity instruments or that
may be settled by the issuance of such equity instruments. Share based compensation cost for restricted stock and restricted stock units 147 RSUs 148 is measured based on the closing fair market value of the Company 146 s common stock on the
date of grant. The Company recognizes share based compensation cost over the award 146 s requisite service period on a straight line basis for time based RSUs and on a graded basis for RSUs that are contingent on the achievement of performance
conditions. The Company recognizes a benefit from share based compensation in the Consolidated Statements of Shareholders 146 Equity if an excess tax benefit is realized. In addition, the Company recognizes the indirect effects of share based
compensation on R amp D tax credits, foreign tax credits and domestic manufacturing deductions in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Further information regarding share based compensation can be found in Note 9, 147 Benefit Plans. 148
Income Taxes The provision for income taxes is computed
using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and for
operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be
realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on
examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 likelihood
of being realized upon settlement. See Note 5, 147 Income Taxes 148 for additional information. Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock
outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period increased to include the number of
additional shares of common stock that would have been outstanding if the potentially dilutive securities had been issued. Potentially dilutive securities include outstanding stock options, shares to be purchased under the Company 146 s employee
stock purchase plan, unvested restricted stock and unvested RSUs. The dilutive effect of potentially dilutive securities is reflected in diluted earnings per share by application of the treasury stock method. Under the treasury stock method, an
increase in the fair market value of the Company 146 s common stock can result in a greater dilutive effect from potentially dilutive securities.
The following table shows the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share for 2015, 2014 and 2013
Potentially dilutive securities whose effect would have been antidilutive are excluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share. Financial Instruments Cash Equivalents and
Marketable Securities All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are classified as cash
equivalents. The Company 146 s marketable debt and equity securities have been classified and accounted for as available for sale. Management determines the appropriate
classification of its investments at the time of purchase and reevaluates the classifications at each balance sheet date. The Company classifies its marketable debt securities as either short term or long term based on each instrument 146 s
underlying contractual maturity date. Marketable debt securities with maturities of 12 months or less are classified as short term and marketable debt securities with maturities greater than 12 months are classified as long term. Marketable equity
securities, including mutual funds, are classified as either short term or long term based on the nature of each security and its availability for use in current operations. The Company 146 s marketable debt and equity securities are carried at
fair value, with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income 147 AOCI 148 in shareholders 146 equity, with the exception of unrealized losses believed to be
other than temporary which are reported in earnings in the current period. The cost of securities sold is based upon the specific identification method.
Derivative Financial Instruments The Company accounts for its
derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities and carries them at fair value. For derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to
variability in expected future cash flows that are designated as cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the gain or loss on the derivative instrument is reported as a component of AOCI in shareholders 146 equity and reclassified into earnings
in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects earnings. The ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the derivative instrument, if any, is recognized in earnings in the current period. To receive hedge accounting
treatment, cash flow hedges must be highly effective in offsetting changes to expected future cash flows on hedged transactions. For options designated as cash flow hedges, changes in the time value are excluded from the assessment of hedge
effectiveness and are recognized in earnings. For derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to changes in the fair value of an asset or a
liability and that are designated as fair value hedges, both the net gain or loss on the derivative instrument as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged item are recognized in earnings in the current period.
For derivative instruments and foreign currency debt that hedge the exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates used for translation of the
net investment in a foreign operation and that are designated as a net investment hedge, the net gain or loss on the effective portion of the derivative instrument is reported in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. For
forward exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges, the Company excludes changes in fair value relating to changes in the forward carry component from its definition of effectiveness. Accordingly, any gains or losses related to this
forward carry component are recognized in earnings in the current period. Derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are adjusted to fair value
The Company records its allowance for doubtful accounts based upon its assessment of various factors, including historical experience, age of the accounts
receivable balances, credit quality of the Company 146 s customers, current economic conditions and other factors that may affect the customers 146 ability to pay.
Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost,
computed using the first in, first out method and net realizable value. Any adjustments to reduce the cost of inventories to their net realizable value are recognized in earnings in the current period. As of September  26, 2015 and
September  27, 2014, the Company 146 s inventories consist primarily of finished goods. Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is computed by use of the straight line method over
the estimated useful lives of the assets, which for buildings is the lesser of 30 years or the remaining life of the underlying building between one to five years for machinery and equipment, including product tooling and manufacturing process
equipment and the shorter of lease terms or ten years for leasehold improvements. The Company capitalizes eligible costs to acquire or develop internal use software that are incurred subsequent to the preliminary project stage. Capitalized costs
related to internal use software are amortized using the straight line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from three to five years. Depreciation and amortization expense on property and equipment was 9.2 billion, 6.9
billion and 5.8 billion during 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Long Lived Assets Including Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
The Company reviews property, plant and equipment, inventory component prepayments and certain identifiable intangibles, excluding goodwill, for
impairment. Long lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of their carrying amounts
to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If property, plant and equipment, inventory component prepayments and certain identifiable intangibles are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the
amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair value. The Company does not amortize goodwill and intangible assets with
indefinite useful lives, rather such assets are required to be tested for impairment at least annually or sooner whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired. The Company performs its goodwill and intangible
asset impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each year. The Company did not recognize any impairment charges related to goodwill or indefinite lived intangible assets during 2015, 2014 and 2013. The Company established reporting units based on
its current reporting structure. For purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, goodwill has been allocated to these reporting units to the extent it relates to each reporting unit. In 2015 and 2014, the Company 146 s goodwill was primarily
allocated to the Americas and Europe reporting units. The Company amortizes its intangible assets with definite useful lives over their estimated
useful lives and reviews these assets for impairment. The Company typically amortizes its acquired intangible assets with definite useful lives over periods from three to seven years.
Fair Value Measurements The Company applies fair value
accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis. The Company defines fair value as the price that would be
received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded
at fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the Company would transact and the market based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as
risks inherent in valuation techniques, transfer restrictions and credit risk. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within
the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement Level 1 150 Quoted prices in active markets
for identical assets or liabilities. Level 2 150 Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and
liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 150 Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management 146 s estimate of assumptions that market participants
The Company 146 s valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market funds and certain
marketable equity securities were derived from quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. The valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of the Company 146 s debt instruments and all other financial instruments,
all of which have counterparties with high credit ratings, were valued based on quoted market prices or model driven valuations using significant inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data.
In accordance with the fair value accounting requirements, companies may choose to measure eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair
value. The Company has not elected the fair value option for any eligible financial instruments. Foreign Currency Translation and Remeasurement
The Company translates the assets and liabilities of its non U.S. dollar functional currency subsidiaries into U.S. dollars using exchange rates in effect
at the end of each period. Revenue and expenses for these subsidiaries are translated using rates that approximate those in effect during the period. Gains and losses from these translations are recognized in foreign currency translation included in
AOCI in shareholders 146 equity. The Company 146 s subsidiaries that use the U.S. dollar as their functional currency remeasure monetary assets and liabilities at exchange rates in effect at the end of each period, and inventories, property and
nonmonetary assets and liabilities at historical rates.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities
The following tables show the Company 146 s cash and available for sale
securities 146 adjusted cost, gross unrealized gains, gross unrealized losses and fair value by significant investment category recorded as cash and cash equivalents or short or long term marketable securities as of September  26, 2015 and
The Company may sell certain of its marketable securities prior to their stated maturities for strategic reasons
including, but not limited to, anticipation of credit deterioration and duration management. The maturities of the Company 146 s long term marketable securities generally range from one to five years.
As of September  26, 2015, the Company considers the declines in market value of its marketable securities investment portfolio to be temporary in
nature and does not consider any of its investments other than temporarily impaired. The Company typically invests in highly rated securities, and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy
generally requires investments to be investment grade, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. Fair values were determined for each individual security in the investment portfolio. When evaluating an investment
for other than temporary impairment the Company reviews factors such as the length of time and extent to which fair value has been below its cost basis, the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, changes in market interest rates
and the Company 146 s intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell the investment before recovery of the investment 146 s cost basis.
Derivative Financial Instruments The Company may use
derivatives to partially offset its business exposure to foreign currency and interest rate risk on expected future cash flows, on net investments in certain foreign subsidiaries and on certain existing assets and liabilities. However, the Company
may choose not to hedge certain exposures for a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, accounting considerations and the prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures. There can be no assurance the hedges will offset more than
a portion of the financial impact resulting from movements in foreign currency exchange or interest rates. To help protect gross margins from
fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, certain of the Company 146 s subsidiaries whose functional currency is the U.S. dollar may hedge a portion of forecasted foreign currency revenue, and subsidiaries whose functional currency is not
the U.S. dollar and who sell in local currencies may hedge a portion of forecasted inventory purchases not denominated in the subsidiaries 146 functional currencies. The Company may enter into forward contracts, option contracts or other
instruments to manage this risk and may designate these instruments as cash flow hedges. The Company typically hedges portions of its forecasted foreign currency exposure associated with revenue and inventory purchases, typically for up to 12
months. To help protect the net investment in a foreign operation from adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates, the Company may enter
into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the changes in the carrying amounts of these investments due to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In addition, the Company may use non derivative financial instruments, such
as its foreign currency denominated debt, as economic hedges of its net investments in certain foreign subsidiaries. In both of these cases, the Company designates these instruments as net investment hedges.
The Company may also enter into non designated foreign currency contracts to partially offset the foreign
currency exchange gains and losses generated by the re measurement of certain assets and liabilities denominated in non functional currencies. The
Company may enter into interest rate swaps, options, or other instruments to manage interest rate risk. These instruments may offset a portion of changes in income or expense, or changes in fair value of the Company 146 s term debt or investments.
The Company designates these instruments as either cash flow or fair value hedges. The Company 146 s hedged interest rate transactions as of September  26, 2015 are expected to be recognized within 10 years.
Cash Flow Hedges The effective portions of cash flow hedges
are recorded in AOCI until the hedged item is recognized in earnings. Deferred gains and losses associated with cash flow hedges of foreign currency revenue are recognized as a component of net sales in the same period as the related revenue is
recognized, and deferred gains and losses related to cash flow hedges of inventory purchases are recognized as a component of cost of sales in the same period as the related costs are recognized. Deferred gains and losses associated with cash flow
hedges of interest income or expense are recognized in other income expense , net in the same period as the related income or expense is recognized. The ineffective portions and amounts excluded from the effectiveness testing of cash flow hedges
are recognized in other income expense , net. Derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges must be de designated as hedges when it is
probable the forecasted hedged transaction will not occur in the initially identified time period or within a subsequent two month time period. Deferred gains and losses in AOCI associated with such derivative instruments are reclassified
immediately into other income expense , net. Any subsequent changes in fair value of such derivative instruments are reflected in other income expense , net unless they are re designated as hedges of other transactions.
Net Investment Hedges The effective portions of net investment
hedges are recorded in other comprehensive income 147 OCI 148 as a part of the cumulative translation adjustment. The ineffective portions and amounts excluded from the effectiveness testing of net investment hedges are recognized in other
income expense , net. Fair Value Hedges Gains and losses
related to changes in fair value hedges are recognized in earnings along with a corresponding loss or gain related to the change in value of the underlying hedged item.
Non Designated Derivatives Derivatives that are not designated
as hedging instruments are adjusted to fair value through earnings in the financial statement line item to which the derivative relates. The Company
records all derivatives in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. The Company 146 s accounting treatment for these derivative instruments is based on its hedge designation. The following tables show the Company 146 s derivative instruments
at gross fair value as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014 in millions
Fair Value ofDerivatives  Designatedas  Hedge  Instruments
Fair Value ofDerivatives  Not  Designatedas  Hedge  Instruments
Fair  Value  ofDerivatives  Designatedas  Hedge  Instruments
Fair Value ofDerivatives  Not  Designatedas  Hedge  Instruments
The fair value of derivative assets is measured using Level 2 fair value inputs and is recorded as other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The fair value of derivative liabilities is measured using Level 2 fair value inputs and is recorded as accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The following table shows the pre tax gains and losses of the Company 146 s derivative and non derivative
instruments designated as cash flow, net investment and fair value hedges on OCI and the Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2015, 2014 and 2013 in millions
Gains Losses recognized in OCI 150 effective portion
Gains Losses reclassified from AOCI into net income 150 effective portion
The following table shows the notional amounts of the Company 146 s outstanding derivative instruments and credit risk
amounts associated with outstanding or unsettled derivative instruments as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014 in millions
The notional amounts for outstanding derivative instruments provide one measure of the transaction volume
outstanding and do not represent the amount of the Company 146 s exposure to credit or market loss. The credit risk amounts represent the Company 146 s gross exposure to potential accounting loss on derivative instruments that are outstanding or
unsettled if all counterparties failed to perform according to the terms of the contract, based on then current currency or interest rates at each respective date. The Company 146 s exposure to credit loss
and market risk will vary over time as currency and interest rates change. Although the table above reflects the notional and credit risk amounts of the Company 146 s derivative instruments, it does not reflect the gains or losses associated with
the exposures and transactions that the instruments are intended to hedge. The amounts ultimately realized upon settlement of these financial instruments, together with the gains and losses on the underlying exposures, will depend on actual market
conditions during the remaining life of the instruments. The Company generally enters into master netting arrangements, which are designed to reduce
credit risk by permitting net settlement of transactions with the same counterparty. To further limit credit risk, the Company generally enters into collateral security arrangements that provide for collateral to be received or posted when the net
fair value of certain financial instruments fluctuates from contractually established thresholds. The Company presents its derivative assets and derivative liabilities at their gross fair values in its Consolidated Balance Sheets. The net cash
collateral received by the Company related to derivative instruments under its collateral security arrangements was 1.0 billion as of September  26, 2015 and 2.1 billion as of September  27, 2014.
Under master netting arrangements with the respective counterparties to the Company 146 s derivative contracts, the  Company is allowed to net
settle transactions with a single net amount payable by one party to the other. As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the potential effects of these rights of set off associated with the Company 146 s derivative contracts,
including the effects of collateral, would be a reduction to both derivative assets and derivative liabilities of  2.2  billion and 1.6 billion, respectively, resulting in net derivative liabilities of  78  million and 549
million, respectively. Accounts Receivable Trade Receivables
The Company has considerable trade receivables outstanding with its third party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, value added resellers,
small and mid sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers however, the Company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. In
addition, when possible, the Company attempts to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers or by requiring third party financing, loans or leases to support credit exposure. These credit financing
arrangements are directly between the third party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements.
As of September  26, 2015, the Company had one customer that represented 10 or more of total trade receivables, which accounted for 12 . As of
September  27, 2014, the Company had two customers that represented 10 or more of total trade receivables, one of which accounted for 16 and the other 13 . The Company 146 s cellular network carriers accounted for 71 and 72 of trade
receivables as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, respectively. Vendor Non Trade Receivables
The Company has non trade receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale of components to these vendors who manufacture
sub assemblies or assemble final products for the Company. The Company purchases these components directly from suppliers. Vendor non trade receivables from three of the Company 146 s vendors accounted for 38 , 18 and 14 of total vendor non trade
receivables as of September  26, 2015 and three of the Company 146 s vendors accounted for 51 , 16 and 14 of total vendor non trade receivables as of September  27, 2014.
Note 3 150 Consolidated Financial Statement Details
The following tables show the Company 146 s consolidated financial statement details as of September  26, 2015 and
September  27, 2014 in millions Property, Plant and Equipment, Net
The following table shows the detail of other income expense , net for 2015, 2014 and 2013 in millions
On July  31, 2014, the Company completed the acquisitions of Beats Music, LLC, which offers a subscription streaming music service,
and Beats Electronics, LLC, which makes Beats reg headphones, speakers and audio software collectively, 147 Beats 148 . The total purchase price consideration for these acquisitions was 2.6
billion, which consisted primarily of cash, of which 2.2 billion was allocated to goodwill, 636 million to acquired intangible assets and 258 million to net liabilities assumed. Concurrent with the close of the acquisitions, the Company repaid
295 million of existing Beats outstanding debt to third party creditors. In conjunction with the Beats acquisitions, the Company issued approximately 5.1  million shares of its common stock to certain former equity holders of Beats. The
restricted stock was valued at approximately 485 million based on the Company 146 s common stock on the acquisition date. The majority of these shares, valued at approximately 417 million, will vest over time based on continued employment with
Apple. The Company also completed various other business acquisitions during 2014 for an aggregate cash consideration, net of cash acquired, of 957
million, of which 828 million was allocated to goodwill, 257 million to acquired intangible assets and 128 million to net liabilities assumed.
The Company 146 s acquired intangible assets with  definite useful lives primarily consist of patents and licenses and are amortized over periods
typically from three to seven years. The following table summarizes the components of gross and net intangible asset balances as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014 in millions
Definite lived and amortizable acquired intangible assets
Indefinite lived and non amortizable acquired intangible assets
Amortization expense related to acquired intangible assets was 1.3 billion, 1.1 billion and 960 million in 2015, 2014
and 2013, respectively. As of September  26, 2015, the remaining weighted average amortization period for acquired intangible assets is 3.6 years. The expected annual amortization expense related to acquired intangible assets as of
The provision for income taxes for 2015, 2014 and 2013, consisted of the following in millions
The foreign provision for income taxes is based on foreign pre tax earnings of 47.6 billion, 33.6 billion and 30.5
billion in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The Company 146 s consolidated financial statements provide for any related tax liability on undistributed earnings that the Company does not intend to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S.
Substantially all of the Company 146 s undistributed international earnings intended to be indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the U.S. were generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, which has a statutory tax rate of 12.5 . As of
September  26, 2015, U.S. income taxes have not been provided on a cumulative total of 91.5 billion of such earnings. The amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability related to these temporary differences is estimated to be 30.0 billion.
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, 186.9 billion and 137.1 billion, respectively, of the Company 146 s cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income
taxation on repatriation to the U.S. A reconciliation of the provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by applying the statutory federal
income tax rate 35 in 2015, 2014 and 2013 to income before provision for income taxes for 2015, 2014 and 2013, is as follows dollars in millions
Indefinitely invested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
The Company 146 s income taxes payable have been reduced by the tax benefits from employee stock plan awards. For stock
options, the Company receives an income tax benefit calculated as the tax effect of the difference between the fair market value of the stock issued at the time of the exercise and the exercise price.  For RSUs, the Company receives an income
tax benefit upon the award 146 s vesting equal to the tax effect of the underlying stock 146 s fair market value. The Company had net excess tax benefits from equity awards of 748 million, 706 million and 643 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013,
respectively, which were reflected as increases to common stock.
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the significant components of the Company 146 s
deferred tax assets and liabilities were in millions
Total deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowance of 0
Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the effects of tax losses, credits and the future income tax effects of
temporary differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured using enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in the years in which those
temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Uncertain Tax Positions
Tax positions are evaluated in a two step process. The Company first determines whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained
upon examination. If a tax position meets the more likely than not recognition threshold it is then measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured as the largest amount of benefit
that is greater than 50 likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company classifies gross interest and penalties and unrecognized tax benefits that are not expected to result in payment or receipt of cash within one year as
non current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of September  26, 2015, the total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was
6.9 billion, of which 2.5 billion, if recognized, would affect the Company 146 s effective tax rate. As of September  27, 2014, the total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was 4.0 billion, of which 1.4 billion, if recognized, would
affect the Company 146 s effective tax rate. The aggregate changes in the balance of gross unrecognized tax benefits, which excludes interest and
penalties, for 2015, 2014 and 2013, is as follows in millions
Increases related to tax positions taken during a prior year
Decreases related to tax positions taken during a prior year
Increases related to tax positions taken during the current year
Decreases related to settlements with taxing authorities
Decreases related to expiration of statute of limitations
The Company includes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes.
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the total amount of gross interest and penalties accrued was 1.3 billion and 630 million, respectively, which is classified as non current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
In connection with tax matters, the Company recognized interest and penalty expense in 2015, 2014 and 2013 of 709 million, 40 million and 189 million, respectively.
The Company is subject to taxation and files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and in many
state and foreign jurisdictions. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service the 147 IRS 148 is currently examining the years 2010 through 2012, and all years prior to 2010 are closed. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local and
foreign tax authorities.  In major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 2003 generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing authorities.
Management believes that an adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax
audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company 146 s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management 146 s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes
in the period such resolution occurs. Although timing of the resolution and or closure of audits is not certain, the Company does not believe it is reasonably possible that its unrecognized tax benefits would materially change in the next
12  months. On June  11, 2014, the European Commission issued an opening decision initiating a formal investigation against Ireland for
alleged state aid to the Company. The opening decision concerns the allocation of profits for taxation purposes of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company. The Company believes the European Commission 146 s assertions are without
merit. If the European Commission were to conclude against Ireland, the European Commission could require Ireland to recover from the Company past taxes covering a period of up to 10 years reflective of the disallowed state aid. While such amount
could be material, as of September  26, 2015 the Company is unable to estimate the impact.
Directors authorized the Company to issue unsecured short term promissory notes 147 Commercial Paper 148 pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company intends to use net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate
purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the Company had 8.5 billion and 6.3 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, respectively, with a weighted average interest rate of
0.14 and 0.12 , respectively, and maturities generally less than nine months. The following table provides a summary of cash flows associated with
the issuance and maturities of Commercial Paper for 2015 and 2014 in millions
Proceeds from repayments of commercial paper, net
September  26, 2015, the Company had outstanding floating and fixed rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of 55.7 billion collectively the 147 Notes 148 . The Notes are senior unsecured obligations, and
interest is payable in arrears, quarterly for the U.S. dollar denominated and Australian dollar denominated floating rate notes, semi annually for the U.S. dollar denominated, Australian dollar denominated, British pound denominated and Japanese
yen denominated fixed rate notes and annually for the euro denominated and Swiss franc denominated fixed rate notes.
The following table provides a summary of the Company 146 s term debt as of September  26, 2015 and
First quarter 2015 euro denominated debt issuance of 128 2.8  billion
Second quarter 2015 debt issuance of 6.5 billion
Second quarter 2015 Swiss franc denominated debt issuance of SFr1.25 billion
Third quarter 2015 Japanese yen denominated debt issuance of yen 250.0 billion
Fourth quarter 2015 British pound denominated debt issuance of pound 1.25 billion
Fourth quarter 2015 Australian dollar denominated debt issuance of A 2.25 billion
Fourth quarter 2015 euro denominated debt issuance of 128 2.0 billion
To manage foreign currency risk associated with the euro denominated notes issued in the first quarter of 2015 and the
British pound denominated, Australian dollar denominated and euro denominated notes issued in the fourth quarter of 2015, the Company entered into currency swaps with an aggregate notional amount of 3.5 billion, 1.9 billion, 1.6 billion and 2.2
billion, respectively, which effectively converted these notes to U.S. dollar denominated notes.
To manage interest rate risk on the U.S. dollar denominated fixed rate notes issued in the second quarter of
2015 and maturing in 2020 and 2022, the Company entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of 2.5 billion. To manage interest rate risk on the U.S. dollar denominated fixed rate notes issued in the third quarter of 2015 and
maturing in 2017, 2020, 2022 and 2025, the Company entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of 4.3 billion. These interest rate swaps effectively converted the fixed interest rates on the U.S. dollar denominated notes to a
floating interest rate. As of September  26, 2015, yen 250.0 billion of the Japanese yen denominated notes was designated as a hedge of the
foreign currency exposure of its net investment in a foreign operation. The foreign currency transaction gain or loss on the Japanese yen denominated debt designated as a hedge is recorded in OCI as a part of the cumulative translation adjustment.
As of September  26, 2015, the carrying value of the debt designated as a net investment hedge was 2.1 billion. For further discussion
regarding the Company 146 s use of derivative instruments see the Derivative Financial Instruments section of Note  2, 147 Financial Instruments. 148
The effective interest rates for the Notes include the interest on the Notes, amortization of the discount and, if applicable, adjustments related to
hedging. The Company recognized 722 million, 381 million and 136 million of interest expense on its term debt for 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
The future principal payments for the Company 146 s Notes as of September  26, 2015 are as follows in millions
As of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, the fair value of the Company 146 s Notes, based on
Level  2 inputs, was 54.9 billion and 28.5 billion, respectively.
dividends per share during the periods presented as follows
Future dividends are subject to declaration by the Board of Directors.
In the third quarter of 2015, the Company 146 s Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization to 140 billion of the Company 146 s
common stock, of which 104 billion had been utilized as of September  26, 2015. The Company 146 s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately
negotiated and or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5 1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended the 147 Exchange Act 148 .
The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into accelerated share repurchase arrangements 147 ASRs 148 with financial institutions. In
exchange for up front payments, the financial institutions deliver shares of the Company 146 s common stock during the purchase periods of each ASR. The total number of shares ultimately delivered, and therefore the average repurchase price paid
per share, is determined at the end of the applicable purchase period of each ASR based on the volume weighted average price of the Company 146 s common stock during that period. The shares received are retired in the periods they are delivered,
and the up front payments are accounted for as a reduction to shareholders 146 equity in the Company 146 s Consolidated Balance Sheets in the periods the payments are made. The Company reflects the ASRs as a repurchase of common stock in the
period delivered for purposes of calculating earnings per share and as forward contracts indexed to its own common stock. The ASRs met all of the applicable criteria for equity classification, and therefore were not accounted for as derivative
instruments. The following table shows the Company 146 s ASR activity and related information during the years ended September  26, 2015 and
Includes 38.3  million shares delivered and retired at the beginning of the purchase period, which began in the third quarter of 2015 and
10.0  million shares delivered and retired at the end of the purchase period, which concluded in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Includes 59.9  million shares delivered and retired at the beginning of the purchase period, which began in the fourth quarter of 2014, 8.3  million
net shares delivered and retired in the first quarter of 2015 and 13.3  million shares delivered and retired at the end of the purchase period, which concluded in the second quarter of 2015.
Additionally, the Company repurchased shares of its common stock in the open market, which were retired upon
repurchase, during the periods presented as follows
Comprehensive income consists of two components, net income and OCI. OCI refers to revenue, expenses, and gains and losses that under
GAAP are recorded as an element of shareholders 146 equity but are excluded from net income. The Company 146 s OCI consists of foreign currency translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using the U.S. dollar as their functional
currency, net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges and unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities classified as available for sale.
The following table shows the pre tax amounts reclassified from AOCI into the Consolidated Statements of Operations, and the associated financial
statement line item, for 2015 and 2014 in millions
Unrealized gains losses on derivative instruments
The following table shows the changes in AOCI by component for 2015 in millions
Other comprehensive income loss before reclassifications
Other comprehensive income loss before reclassifications
quarter of 2014, shareholders approved the 2014 Employee Stock Plan the 147 2014 Plan 148 and terminated the Company 146 s authority to grant new awards under the 2003 Employee Stock Plan the 147 2003 Plan 148 . The 2014 Plan provides
for broad based equity grants to employees, including executive officers, and permits the granting of RSUs, stock grants, performance based awards, stock options and stock appreciation rights, as well as cash bonus awards. RSUs granted under the
2014 Plan generally vest over four years, based on continued employment, and are settled upon vesting in shares of the Company 146 s common stock on a one for one basis. Each share issued with respect to RSUs granted under the 2014 Plan reduces the
number of shares available for grant under the plan by two shares. RSUs cancelled and shares withheld to satisfy tax withholding obligations increase the number of shares available for grant under the 2014 Plan utilizing a factor of two times the
number of RSUs cancelled or shares withheld. Currently, all RSUs granted under the 2014 Plan have dividend equivalent rights 147 DERs 148 , which entitle holders of RSUs to the same dividend value per share as holders of common stock. DERs are
subject to the same vesting and other terms and conditions as the corresponding unvested RSUs. DERs are accumulated and paid when the underlying shares vest. Upon approval of the 2014 Plan, the Company reserved 385  million shares plus the
number of shares remaining that were reserved but not issued under the 2003 Plan. Shares subject to outstanding awards under the 2003 Plan that expire, are cancelled or otherwise terminate, or are withheld to satisfy tax withholding obligations with
respect to RSUs, will also be available for awards under the 2014 Plan. As of September  26, 2015, approximately 442.9  million shares were reserved for future issuance under the 2014 Plan.
2003 Employee Stock Plan The 2003 Plan is a shareholder
approved plan that provided for broad based equity grants to employees, including executive officers. The 2003 Plan permitted the granting of incentive stock options, nonstatutory stock options, RSUs, stock appreciation rights, stock purchase rights
and performance based awards. Options granted under the 2003 Plan generally expire seven to ten years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of four years, based on continued employment, with either annual, semi annual
or quarterly vesting. RSUs granted under the 2003 Plan generally vest over two to four years, based on continued employment and are settled upon vesting in shares of the Company 146 s common stock on a one for one basis. All RSUs, other than RSUs
held by the Chief Executive Officer, granted under the 2003 Plan have DERs. DERs are subject to the same vesting and other terms and conditions as the corresponding unvested RSUs. DERs are accumulated and paid when the underlying shares vest. In the
second quarter of 2014, the Company terminated the authority to grant new awards under the 2003 Plan. 1997 Director Stock Plan
The 1997 Director Stock Plan the 147 Director Plan 148 is a shareholder approved plan that i  permits the Company to grant awards of RSUs or
stock options to the Company 146 s non employee directors, ii  provides for automatic initial grants of RSUs upon a non employee director joining the Board of Directors and automatic annual grants of RSUs at each annual meeting of
shareholders, and iii  permits the Board of Directors to prospectively change the relative mixture of stock options and RSUs for the initial and annual award grants and the methodology for determining the number of shares of the Company 146 s
common stock subject to these grants without shareholder approval. Each share issued with respect to RSUs granted under the Director Plan reduces the number of shares available for grant under the plan by two shares. The Director Plan expires
November  9, 2019. All RSUs granted under the Director Plan are entitled to DERs. DERs are subject to the same vesting and other terms and conditions as the corresponding unvested RSUs. DERs are accumulated and paid when the underlying shares
vest. As of September  26, 2015, approximately 1.2  million shares were reserved for future issuance under the Director Plan. Rule 10b5 1 Trading Plans
During the fourth quarter of 2015, Section  16 officers Timothy D. Cook, Angela Ahrendts, Luca Maestri, Daniel Riccio, Philip Schiller and
Jeffrey Williams had equity trading plans in place in accordance with Rule 10b5 1 c 1 under the Exchange Act. An equity trading plan is a written document that pre establishes the amounts, prices and dates or formula for determining the amounts,
prices and dates of future purchases or sales of the Company 146 s stock, including shares acquired pursuant to the Company 146 s employee and director equity plans.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan The Employee Stock Purchase Plan
the 147 Purchase Plan 148 is a shareholder approved plan under which substantially all employees may purchase the Company 146 s common stock through payroll deductions at a price equal to 85 of the lower of the fair market values of the
stock as of the beginning or the end of six month offering periods. An employee 146 s payroll deductions under the Purchase Plan are limited to 10 of the employee 146 s compensation and employees may not purchase more than 25,000 of stock during
any calendar year. As of September  26, 2015, approximately 53.0  million shares were reserved for future issuance under the Purchase Plan.
Company 146 s 401 k Plan is a deferred salary arrangement under Section  401 k of the Internal Revenue Code. Under the 401 k Plan, participating U.S. employees may defer a portion of their pre tax earnings, up to the IRS annual contribution
limit 18,000 for calendar year 2015 . The Company matches 50 to 100 of each employee 146 s contributions, depending on length of service, up to a maximum 6 of the employee 146 s eligible earnings. The Company 146 s matching contributions to
the 401 k Plan were 200 million, 163 million and 135 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Restricted Stock Units
A summary of the Company 146 s RSU activity and related information for 2015, 2014 and 2013, is as follows
The fair value as of the respective vesting dates of RSUs was 4.8 billion, 3.4 billion and 3.1 billion for 2015, 2014
and 2013, respectively. The majority of RSUs that vested in 2015, 2014 and 2013 were net share settled such that the Company withheld shares with value equivalent to the employees 146 minimum statutory obligation for the applicable income and
other employment taxes, and remitted the cash to the appropriate taxing authorities. The total shares withheld were approximately 14.1  million, 15.6  million and 15.5  million for 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, and were based on the
value of the RSUs on their respective vesting dates as determined by the Company 146 s closing stock price. Total payments for the employees 146 tax obligations to taxing authorities were 1.6 billion, 1.2 billion and 1.1 billion in 2015, 2014
and 2013, respectively, and are reflected as a financing activity within the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.  These net share settlements had the effect of share repurchases by the Company as they reduced the number of shares that would
have otherwise been issued as a result of the vesting and did not represent an expense to the Company. Stock Options
The Company had 1.2  million stock options outstanding as of September  26, 2015, with a weighted average exercise price per share of 15.08 and
weighted average remaining contractual term of 4.1 years, substantially all of which are exercisable. The aggregate intrinsic value of the stock options outstanding as of September  26, 2015 was 120 million, which represents the value of the
Company 146 s closing stock price on the last trading day of the period in excess of the weighted average exercise price multiplied by the number of options outstanding. Total intrinsic value of options at time of exercise was 479 million, 1.5
billion and 1.0 billion for 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
The following table shows a summary of the share based compensation expense included in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2015, 2014 and 2013
The income tax benefit related to share based compensation expense was 1.2 billion, 1.0 billion and 816 million for
2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. As of September  26, 2015, the total unrecognized compensation cost related to outstanding stock options, RSUs and restricted stock was 6.8 billion, which the Company expects to recognize over a
following table shows changes in the Company 146 s accrued warranties and related costs for 2015, 2014 and 2013 in millions
The Company generally does not indemnify end users of its operating system and application software against legal claims
that the software infringes third party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and or damages in the event of an
infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end users of its
operating system or application software for infringement of third party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September  26, 2015 or September  27, 2014.
In September 2015, the Company introduced the iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who purchase an iPhone 6s and 6s Plus in one
of its U.S. physical retail stores and activate the purchased iPhone with one of the four national carriers. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a new iPhone, provided certain conditions are met. One
of the conditions of this program requires the customer to finance the initial purchase price of the iPhone with a third party lender. Upon exercise of the trade in right and purchase of a new iPhone, the Company satisfies the customer 146 s
outstanding balance due to the third party lender on the original device. The Company accounts for the trade in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such right with subsequent changes to the
guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers.
Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such
individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification
claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations.
Concentrations in the Available Sources of Supply of Materials and Product
Although most components essential to the Company 146 s business are generally available from multiple sources, a number of components are currently
obtained from single or limited sources. In addition, the Company competes for various components with other participants in the markets for mobile communication and media devices and personal computers. Therefore, many components used by the
Company, including those that are available from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide shortage and significant pricing fluctuations that could materially adversely affect the Company 146 s financial condition and operating
The Company uses some custom components that are not commonly used by its competitors, and new products
introduced by the Company often utilize custom components available from only one source. When a component or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers 146 yields have matured or manufacturing
capacity has increased. If the Company 146 s supply of components for a new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if an outsourcing partner delayed shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company 146 s financial condition
and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company 146 s business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source,
or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an alternative source. Continued availability of these components at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers concentrated on the production of common components instead of
components customized to meet the Company 146 s requirements. The Company has entered into agreements for the supply of many components however,
there can be no guarantee that the Company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. Therefore, the Company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that could materially
adversely affect its financial condition and operating results. Substantially all of the Company 146 s hardware products are manufactured by
outsourcing partners that are located primarily in Asia. A significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a small number of outsourcing partners, often in single locations. Certain of these outsourcing partners are the
sole sourced suppliers of components and manufacturers for many of the Company 146 s products. Although the Company works closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the Company 146 s operating results could be adversely
affected if its outsourcing partners were unable to meet their production commitments. The Company 146 s purchase commitments typically cover its requirements for periods up to 150 days.
Other Off Balance Sheet Commitments Operating Leases
The Company leases various equipment and facilities, including retail space, under noncancelable operating lease arrangements. The Company does not
currently utilize any other off balance sheet financing arrangements. The major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi year renewal options. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had a total
of 463 retail stores. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi year renewal options. As of September  26, 2015, the Company 146 s total future minimum
lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were 6.3 billion, of which 3.6 billion related to leases for retail space. Rent expense under
all operating leases, including both cancelable and noncancelable leases, was 794 million, 717 million and 645 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases having remaining terms
in excess of one year as of September  26, 2015, are as follows in millions
utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub assemblies for the Company 146 s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand
information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires
components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts and open orders based on projected demand information. Where appropriate,  the  purchases are applied to  inventory component prepayments  that
are  outstanding with the  respective supplier. As of September  26, 2015, the Company had outstanding off balance sheet third party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of 29.5 billion.
In addition to the commitments mentioned above, the Company had other off balance sheet obligations of 7.3
billion as of September  26, 2015 that consisted of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to inventory prepayments, advertising, licensing, R amp D, internet
and telecommunications services, energy and other obligations. Contingencies
The Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of business and that have not been fully
adjudicated, certain of which are discussed in Part I, Item  1A of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Risk Factors 148 and in Part I, Item  3 of this Form 10 K under the heading 147 Legal Proceedings. 148 In the opinion of
management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the
outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in
excess of management 146 s expectations, the Company 146 s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected.
Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, et al. On
August  24, 2012, a jury returned a verdict awarding the Company 1.05 billion in its lawsuit against Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd and affiliated parties in the United States District Court, Northern District of California, San Jose Division. On
March  6, 2014, the District Court entered final judgment in favor of the Company in the amount of approximately 930 million.  On May  18, 2015, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed in part, and reversed in part,
the decision of the District Court. As a result, the Court of Appeals ordered entry of final judgment on damages in the amount of approximately 548 million, with the District Court to determine supplemental damages and interest, as well as damages
owed for products subject to the reversal in part. Because  the ruling remains subject to further proceedings, the Company has not recognized the award in its results of operations.
Note 11 150 Segment Information and Geographic Data
The Company reports segment information based on the 147 management 148 approach. The management approach designates the internal
reporting used by management for making decisions and assessing performance as the source of the Company 146 s reportable operating segments. The
Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company 146 s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South
America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and those Asian countries not
included in the Company 146 s other reportable operating segments. Although each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services, they are managed separately to better align with the location of the
Company 146 s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. The accounting policies of the various segments are the same as those described in Note 1, 147 Summary of Significant Accounting
Policies. 148 The Company evaluates the performance of its reportable operating segments based on net sales and operating income. Net sales for
geographic segments are generally based on the location of customers and sales through the Company 146 s retail stores located in those geographic locations. Operating income for each segment includes net sales to third parties, related cost of
sales and operating expenses directly attributable to the segment. Advertising expenses are generally included in the geographic segment in which the expenditures are incurred. Operating income for each segment excludes other income and expense and
certain expenses managed outside the reportable operating segments. Costs excluded from segment operating income include various corporate expenses such as R amp D, corporate marketing expenses, certain share based compensation expenses, income
taxes, various nonrecurring charges and other separately managed general and administrative costs. The Company does not include intercompany transfers between segments for management reporting purposes.
The following table shows information by reportable operating segment for 2015, 2014 and 2013 in millions
A reconciliation of the Company 146 s segment operating income to the Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2015,
The U.S. and China were the only countries that accounted for more than 10 of the Company 146 s net sales in 2015, 2014
and 2013. There was no single customer that accounted for more than 10 of net sales in 2015, 2014 or 2013. Net sales for 2015, 2014 and 2013 and long lived assets as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014 are as follows in
China includes Hong Kong. Long lived assets located in China consist primarily of product tooling and
manufacturing process equipment and assets related to retail stores and related infrastructure.
Net sales by product for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows in millions
Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non software services.
Includes revenue from the iTunes Store, App Store, Mac App Store, iBooks Store, Apple Music, AppleCare, Apple Pay, licensing and other services.
Includes sales of Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats products, iPod and Apple branded and third party accessories.
Note 12 150 Selected Quarterly Financial Information Unaudited
The following tables show a summary of the Company 146 s quarterly financial information for each of the four quarters of 2015 and
Basic and diluted earnings per share are computed independently for each of the quarters presented. Therefore, the sum of quarterly basic and diluted per
share information may not equal annual basic and diluted earnings per share.
Report of Ernst  amp Young LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting
Firm The Board of Directors and Shareholders of Apple Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Apple Inc. as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, and the related
consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, shareholders 146 equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended September  26, 2015. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company 146 s
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance
with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States . Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. In our opinion, the
financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of Apple Inc. at September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended September  26, 2015, in conformity with U.S.  generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States , Apple Inc. 146 s internal
control over financial reporting as of September  26, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control  150  Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 2013
framework and our report dated October  28, 2015 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon. s Ernst  amp Young LLP
Report of Ernst  amp Young LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
The Board of Directors and Shareholders of Apple Inc.
We have audited Apple Inc. 146 s internal control over financial reporting as of September  26, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal
Control 150 Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 2013 framework 147 the COSO criteria 148 . Apple Inc. 146 s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management 146 s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility
is to express an opinion on the Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance
with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States . Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
A company 146 s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company 146 s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
1  pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company 2  provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors
of the company and 3  provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company 146 s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, Apple Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of September  26, 2015, based
on the COSO criteria. We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States , the
2015 consolidated financial statements of Apple Inc. and our report dated October  28, 2015 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure None.
Controls and Procedures Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Based on an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of the Company 146 s management, the Company 146 s principal executive officer
and principal financial officer have concluded that the Company 146 s disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a 15 e and 15d 15 e under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended the 147 Exchange Act 148 were effective
as of September  26, 2015 to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the Company in reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is i  recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the
time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms and ii  accumulated and communicated to the Company 146 s management, including its principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as appropriate
to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Inherent Limitations Over Internal Controls
The Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles 147 GAAP 148 . The Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the Company 146 s
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and that the
Company 146 s receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of the Company 146 s management and directors and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the Company 146 s assets that could
have a material effect on the financial statements. Management, including the Company 146 s Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer, does not expect that the Company 146 s internal controls will prevent or detect all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the
objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations
in all control systems, no evaluation of internal controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected. Also, any evaluation of the effectiveness of controls in future periods are subject
to the risk that those internal controls may become inadequate because of changes in business conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management 146 s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The Company 146 s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule
13a 15 f under the Exchange Act . Management conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria set forth in Internal Control 150 Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 2013 framework . Based on the Company 146 s assessment, management has concluded that its internal control over financial reporting was effective as of September  26, 2015 to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The Company 146 s independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst  amp Young LLP, has
issued an audit report on the Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting, which appears in Part II, Item  8 of this Form 10 K. Changes in
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting There were no changes in the Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting during the fourth
quarter of 2015, which were identified in connection with management 146 s evaluation required by paragraph d  of rules 13a 15 and 15d 15 under the Exchange Act, that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect,
the Company 146 s internal control over financial reporting.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance The information required by this Item is
set forth under the headings 147 Directors, Corporate Governance and Executive Officers 148 in the Company 146 s 2016 Proxy Statement to be filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission the 147 SEC 148 within 120 days after
September  26, 2015 in connection with the solicitation of proxies for the Company 146 s 2016 annual meeting of shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
The Company has a code of ethics, 147 Business Conduct The way we do business worldwide, 148 that applies to all employees, including the
Company 146 s principal executive officer, principal financial officer, and principal accounting officer, as well as to the members of the Board of Directors of the Company. The code is available at investor.apple.com corporate governance.cfm. The
Company intends to disclose any changes in, or waivers from, this code by posting such information on the same website or by filing a Form 8 K, in each case to the extent such disclosure is required by rules of the SEC or the NASDAQ Stock Market
Executive Compensation The information required by this Item is set forth under the heading
147 Executive Compensation 148 and under the subheadings 147 Board Oversight of Risk Management, 148 147 Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation, 148 147 Compensation of Directors 148 and 147 Director
Compensation 2015 148 under the heading 147 Directors, Corporate Governance and Executive Officers 148 in the Company 146 s 2016 Proxy Statement to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after September  26, 2015 and is incorporated herein
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters The
information required by this Item is set forth under the headings 147 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management 148 and 147 Equity Compensation Plan Information 148 in the Company 146 s 2016 Proxy Statement to be filed
with the SEC within 120 days after September  26, 2015 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence The information required
by this Item is set forth under the subheadings 147 Board Committees 148 , 147 Review, Approval or Ratification of Transactions with Related Persons 148 and 147 Transactions with Related Persons 148 under the heading 147 Directors,
Corporate Governance and Executive Officers 148 in the Company 146 s 2016 Proxy Statement to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after September  26, 2015 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services The information required by this Item is set forth under
the subheadings 147 Fees Paid to Auditors 148 and 147 Policy on Audit Committee Pre Approval of Audit and Non Audit Services Performed by the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 148 under the proposal 147 Ratification of
Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 148 in the Company 146 s 2016 Proxy Statement to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after September  26, 2015 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended September  26, 2015,  September
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended September  26, 2015,  September
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September  26, 2015 and September  27, 2014
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders 146 Equity for the years ended September  26, 2015,  September
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended September  26, 2015,  September
Selected Quarterly Financial Information Unaudited
Reports of Ernst  amp Young LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not applicable or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto included in this Form 10 K.
Exhibits required by Item  601 of Regulation S K
The information required by this Section a 3 of Item  15 is set forth on the exhibit index that follows the Signatures page of this FONT
Pursuant to the requirements of Section  13 or 15 d  of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date October  28, 2015
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Timothy D. Cook and Luca Maestri, jointly and
severally, his or her attorneys in fact, each with the power of substitution, for him or her in any and all capacities, to sign any amendments to this Annual Report on
Form 10 K, and to file the same, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that each of said FONT
STYLE white space nowrap attorneys in fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated
Chief Executive Officer and Director Principal Executive
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer Principal Financial
Senior Director of Corporate Accounting Principal Accounting
Restated Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant effective as of
Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Registrant effective as of
Form of Common Stock Certificate of the Registrant.
Indenture, dated as of April 29, 2013, between the Registrant and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as Trustee.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of May 3, 2013, including forms of global notes representing the Floating Rate Notes due 2016, Floating Rate Notes due 2018, 0.45 Notes due
2016, 1.00 Notes due 2018, 2.40 Notes due 2023 and 3.85 Notes due 2043.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of May 6, 2014, including forms of global notes representing the Floating Rate Notes due 2017, Floating Rate Notes due 2019, 1.05 Notes due
2017, 2.10 Notes due 2019, 2.85 Notes due 2021, 3.45 Notes due 2024 and 4.45 Notes due 2044.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of November 10, 2014, including forms of global notes representing the 1.000 Notes due 2022 and 1.625 Notes due 2026.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of February 9, 2015, including forms of global notes representing the Floating Rate Notes due 2020, 1.55 Notes due 2020, 2.15 Notes due 2022,
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of May 13, 2015, including forms of global notes representing the Floating Rate Notes due 2017, Floating Rate Notes due 2020, 0.900 Notes due
2017, 2.000 Notes due 2020, 2.700 Notes due 2022, 3.200 Notes due 2025, and 4.375 Notes due 2045.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of June 10, 2015, including forms of global notes representing the 0.35 Notes due 2020.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of July 31, 2015, including forms of global notes representing the 3.05 Notes due 2029 and 3.60 Notes due 2042.
Officer 146 s Certificate of the Registrant, dated as of September 17, 2015, including forms of global notes representing the 1.375 Notes due 2024 and 2.000 Notes due 2027.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended and restated as of March 10, 2015.
Form of Indemnification Agreement between the Registrant and each director and executive officer of the Registrant.
1997 Director Stock Plan, as amended through August 23, 2012.
2003 Employee Stock Plan, as amended through February 25, 2010.
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under 2003 Employee Stock Plan effective as of November 16, 2010.
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under 2003 Employee Stock Plan effective as of April 6, 2012.
Summary Description of Amendment, effective as of May 24, 2012, to certain Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreements outstanding as of April 5, 2012.
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under 2014 Employee Stock Plan as of February 28, 2014.
Form of Performance Award Agreement under 2014 Employee Stock Plan effective as of February 28, 2014.
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under 2014 Employee Stock Plan effective as of August 26, 2014.
Form of Performance Award Agreement under 2014 Employee Stock Plan effective as of August 26, 2014.
Form of Amendment, effective as of August 26, 2014, to Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreements and Performance Award Agreements outstanding as of August 26, 2014.
Offer Letter, dated August 1, 2013, from the Registrant to Angela Ahrendts.
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
Consent of Ernst amp Young LLP, Independent Registered Public
Power of Attorney included on the Signatures page of this Annual
Rule 13a 14 a 15d 14 a Certification of Chief Executive Officer.
Rule 13a 14 a 15d 14 a Certification of Chief Financial Officer.
Section 1350 Certifications of Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.
Indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
Certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long term debt securities of the Registrant are omitted pursuant to Item 601 b 4 iii of Regulation
S K. The Registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the SEC, upon request, copies of any such instruments.
x2612 ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15 d OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
x2610 TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15 d OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                     to
Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter
Registrant x2019 s telephone number, including area code 303  595 4000
Securities registered pursuant to Section  12 b of the Act
Securities registered pursuant to Section  12 g of the Act None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule  405 of the Securities Act.     Yes   x2612     No   x2610
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section  13 or Section  15 d of the Act.     Yes   x2610     No   x2612
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant 1  has filed all reports required to be filed by Section  13 or 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12  months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports , and 2  has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90  days.     Yes   x2612     No   x2610
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S T xA7 232.405 of this chapter during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files .     x2612   Yes     x2610   No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item  405 of Regulation  S K xA7 229.405 of this chapter is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant x2019 s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part  III of this Form  10 K or any amendment to this Form  10 K.   x2610
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of x201C large accelerated filer, x201D x201C accelerated filer, x201D and x201C smaller reporting company x201D in Rule  12b 2 of the Exchange Act check one
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company as defined in Rule  12b 2 of the Act .     Yes   x2610     No   x2612
As of January  29, 2016, there were 30,044,250 shares of the registrant x2019 s common stock, par value of 0.01 per share outstanding.
Part  III incorporates certain information by reference from the registrant x2019 s definitive proxy statement for the 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after the close of the registrant x2019 s fiscal year ended December  31, 2015.
Market for Registrant x2019 s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Management x2019 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
Expansion x2013 Our expansion into international markets may present increased risks due to lower customer awareness of our brand, our unfamiliarity with those markets and other factors x201D in Item 1A. x201C Risk Factors. x201D
A Few Things, Thousands of Ways. Chipotle restaurants serve only a few things burritos, burrito bowls, tacos and salads. But because customers can choose from four different meats or tofu, two types of beans and a variety of extras such as salsas, guacamole, cheese and lettuce, there x2019 s enough variety to extend our menu to provide thousands of choices. We plan to keep a simple menu, but we x2019 ll consider additions that we think make sense.
Culture of Top Performers.  In addition to our focus on the food we serve, we have a similarly focused people culture with an emphasis on identifying, hiring and empowering top performing employees. We are committed to creating a performance based culture that leads to the best restaurant experience possible for our employees and our customers. The foundation of that culture starts
A great dining experience in our restaurants is our most powerful marketing of all. But there is still a need to introduce our brand to new customers and engage with existing ones in other ways, by helping them understand what makes Chipotle different than
Alongside our excellent restaurant teams, these efforts have helped us create considerable word of mouth publicity as our customers learn more about us and share with others. This approach allows us to build awareness and loyalty with relatively low advertising expenditures, even in a competitive category, and to differentiate Chipotle as a company that is committed to doing the right thing in every facet of our business.
ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen and Pizzeria Locale
We believe that the fundamental principles on which our restaurants are based x2014 finding the very best sustainably raised ingredients, prepared and cooked using classical methods in front of the customer, and served in an interactive format by special people dedicated to providing a great dining experience x2014 can be adapted to cuisines other than the food we serve at Chipotle.
We expect our openings in 2016 to include a small number of ShopHouse and Pizzeria Locale restaurants, with our immediate restaurant expansion focus remaining on thoughtfully growing the Chipotle brand.
We will continue to invest in our applications and systems to support our continued expansion. See x201C General Business Risks x2014 We may be harmed by security risks we face in connection with our electronic processing and transmission of confidential customer and employee information x201D in Item  1A. x201C Risk Factors, x201D for a discussion of risks associated with our information systems.
As of December  31, 2015, we had about 59,330 employees, including about 5,100 salaried employees and about 54,230 hourly employees. None of our employees are unionized or covered by a collective bargaining agreement.
We also believe that the design of our restaurants is our proprietary trade dress. From time to time we have taken action against other restaurants that we believe are misappropriating our trademarks, restaurant designs or advertising. Although our policy is to protect and defend vigorously our rights to our intellectual property, we may not be able to adequately protect our intellectual property, which could harm the value of our brand and adversely affect our business.
The contents of the websites mentioned above are not incorporated into and should not be considered a part of this report. The references to the URLs for these websites are intended to be inactive textual references only.
Risks Related to Food Safety Incidents that Occurred During 2015
Our system wide restaurant sales were adversely impacted beginning in the fourth quarter of 2015 by food safety incidents associated with our restaurants, and we may not be able to regain lost sales.
Declines in comparable restaurant sales have a significant adverse impact on our profitability, as described further under x201C Risks Related to our Growth Strategy and Future Expansion x2013 Our sales and profitability will be adversely affected if comparable restaurant sales continue to decline or otherwise fail to meet expectations in the future. x201D
Changes we have made in our operations, or that we make in the future, to further enhance the safety of the food we serve will adversely impact our financial performance and may negatively impact customer perception of our brand.
Regulatory actions and litigation related to food safety incidents that impacted us beginning in the fourth quarter of 2015 may adversely impact us.
Any further instances of food borne or localized illnesses associated with our restaurants would result in increased negative publicity and further adverse impact on customer perceptions of our brand, which would likely result in further declines in our sales.
Risks Related to our Growth Strategy and Future Expansion
Our sales and profitability will be further adversely affected if comparable restaurant sales continue to decline or otherwise fail to meet expectations in the future.
Our ability to increase comparable restaurant sales depends on many factors, including
perceptions of the Chipotle brand and the safety and quality of our food
competition, especially from an increasing number of competitors in the fast casual segment of the restaurant industry and from other restaurant concepts whose strategies overlap with elements of our Food With Integrity philosophy
executing our strategies effectively, including our development strategy, our marketing and branding strategies, our initiatives to increase the speed at which our crews serve each customer, expanded use of online and other electronic ordering, increasing sales from our catering options, and new menu items, each of which we may not be able to accomplish or which may not have the impact we expect
changes in consumer preferences and discretionary spending, including weaker consumer spending during periods of economic difficulty or uncertainty
initial sales performance of new restaurants, and the impact of new Chipotle restaurants in the event customers who frequent one of our restaurants begin to visit one of our new restaurants instead, as further described below under x201C x2014 Our new restaurants, once opened, may not be profitable, and may adversely impact the sales of our existing restaurants x201D
our ability to increase menu prices without adversely impacting transaction counts to such a degree that the impact from lower transactions equals or exceeds the benefit of the menu price increase and without x201C trade down x201D by customers or other reduction in average check in response to price increases
weather, road construction and other factors limiting access to our restaurants and
changes in government regulation that may impact customer perceptions of our food, including initiatives regarding menu labeling and marketing claims about the origin or makeup of some of the ingredients we serve.
A number of these factors are beyond our control. As a result, it is possible that changes in our comparable restaurant sales will continue to be negative or that we otherwise will not achieve our targeted or expected comparable restaurant sales.
Increasing our sales and profitability depends substantially on our ability to open new restaurants in sites and on terms attractive to us, which is subject to many unpredictable factors.
We had 2,010 restaurants in operation as of December  31, 2015. We plan to increase the number of our restaurants significantly, and plan to open between 220 and 235 new restaurants in 2016. However, we have in the past experienced delays in opening some restaurants and that could happen again as a result of any one or more of the following factors
our potential inability to locate and secure new restaurant sites in locations that we believe to be attractive
obstacles to hiring and training qualified operating personnel in the local market
difficulty managing construction and development costs of new restaurants at affordable levels, particularly in competitive markets and when real estate development activity is robust
delay or cancellation of new site development by developers and landlords, which may become increasingly common during periods of economic uncertainty or tight credit
difficulty ramping up the growth of our international business or new restaurant concepts, including for the reasons described below under x201C x2014 Our expansion into international markets may present increased risks due to lower customer awareness of our brand, our unfamiliarity with those markets and other factors x201D and x201C x2014 ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen, Pizzeria Locale and other new restaurant concepts may not contribute to our growth x201D
difficulty negotiating leases with acceptable terms
any shortages of construction labor or materials
lack of availability of, or inability to obtain, adequate supplies of ingredients that meet our quality standards
failures or delays in securing required governmental approvals including construction, parking and other permits and
the impact of inclement weather, natural disasters and other calamities.
Our new restaurants, once opened, may not be profitable, and may adversely impact the sales of our existing restaurants.
Our expansion into international markets may present increased risks due to lower customer awareness of our brand, our unfamiliarity with those markets and other factors.
We may also find it more difficult in international markets to hire, motivate and keep qualified employees who can project our vision, passion and culture, and labor costs may be higher in international markets due to increased regulation or local market conditions. In addition, restaurants outside the U.S. have had higher construction, occupancy and food costs than restaurants in
ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen, Pizzeria Locale and other new restaurant concepts may not contribute to our growth.
Our failure to manage our growth effectively could harm our business and operating results.
Risks Related to Operating in the Restaurant Industry
Our business could be adversely affected by increased labor costs or difficulties in finding the right employees for our restaurants and the right field leaders.
crew could be costly and could negatively impact our operations. Moreover, if our managers do not schedule our restaurant crews efficiently, our restaurants may be overstaffed at some times, which adversely impacts our labor costs as a percentage of revenue, decreasing our operating margins.   Efficient staffing may be more challenging in 2016 due to the uncertainty in sales trends created by the food borne illness incidents described elsewhere in this report.
Because we do not franchise, risks associated with hiring and maintaining a large workforce, including increases in wage rates or the cost of employee benefits, compliance with laws and regulations related to the hiring, payment and termination of employees, and employee related litigation, may be more pronounced for us than for restaurant companies at which some or all of these risks are borne by franchisees or other operating contractors.
Changes in food and supply costs could adversely affect our results of operations.
Several of our competitors compete by offering menu items that are specifically identified as low in carbohydrates, better for customers or otherwise targeted at particular consumer preferences. Many of our competitors in the fast casual and quick service segments of the restaurant industry also emphasize lower cost, x201C value meal x201D menu options, a strategy we do not currently pursue. Our sales may be adversely affected by these products and price competition.
Any of these competitive factors may adversely affect us and reduce our sales and profits.
Instances of food borne illnesses could adversely affect customer perceptions of, or the price or availability of, ingredients we use to prepare our food, which may adversely impact our sales.
Failure to receive frequent deliveries of higher quality food ingredients and other supplies meeting our specifications could harm our operations.
Changes in customer tastes and preferences, spending patterns and demographic trends could cause sales to decline.
If we were to experience widespread difficulty renewing existing leases on favorable terms, our revenue or occupancy costs could be adversely affected.
Governmental regulation in one or more of the following areas may adversely affect our existing and future operations and results, including by harming our ability to open new restaurants or increasing our operating costs.
We are subject to various federal and state laws governing our relationship with and other matters pertaining to our employees, including wage and hour laws, requirements to provide meal and rest periods or other benefits, family leave mandates, requirements regarding working conditions and accommodations to certain employees, citizenship or work authorization and related requirements,
Americans with Disabilities Act and Similar State Laws
Because we do not franchise, the costs of compliance and other risks associated with government regulation of our business, as described above, may be more pronounced for us than for restaurant companies at which some or all of these risks are borne by franchisees or other operating contractors.
The effect of recent changes to U.S. healthcare laws may increase our healthcare costs and negatively impact our financial results.
We could be party to litigation that could adversely affect us by distracting management, increasing our expenses or subjecting us to material money damages and other remedies.
We may not persuade customers of the benefits of paying our prices for higher quality food.
Our Food With Integrity philosophy subjects us to risks.
Our success may depend on the continued service and availability of key personnel.
Our marketing and advertising strategies may not be successful, which could adversely impact our business.
We may be harmed by security risks we face in connection with our electronic processing and transmission of confidential customer and employee information.
Negative publicity relating to our restaurants or our company could adversely impact our reputation, which may significantly harm us.
Our insurance coverage and self insurance reserves may not cover future claims.
We maintain various insurance policies for employee health, worker x2019 s compensation, general liability, property damage and auto liability. We are self insured for our employee health plans but have third party insurance coverage to limit exposure for both individual and aggregate claim costs.  We are also responsible for losses up to a certain limit for worker x2019 s compensation, general liability, property damage and auto liability insurance.
We may not be able to adequately protect our intellectual property, which could harm the value of our brands and adversely affect our business.
Our quarterly results may fluctuate significantly and could fall below the expectations of securities analysts and investors due to various factors.
Our quarterly results may fluctuate significantly and could fail to meet the expectations of securities analysts and investors because of various factors, including
changes in comparable restaurant sales and customer visits, including as a result of perceptions about our brand, competition, changes in consumer confidence or discretionary spending, and other factors listed in these Risk Factors
additional negative publicity about the occurrence of food borne illnesses, the ingredients we use, or other problems at our restaurants
fluctuations in supply costs, particularly for our most significant food items, including increased ingredient costs as a result of changes we x2019 ve made to enhance the safety of our food
labor availability and wages of restaurant management and crew, as well as temporary fluctuations in labor costs as a result of large scale changes in workforce
our ability to raise menu prices without adversely impacting customer traffic, particularly if food and labor costs continue to increase
the timing of new restaurant openings and related revenues and expenses
operating costs at newly opened restaurants, which are often materially greater during the first several months of operation
the impact of inclement weather, natural disasters and other calamities, such as freezes that have impacted produce crops and droughts that have impacted livestock and the supply of certain meats
variations in general economic conditions, including the impact of declining interest rates on our interest income
litigation, settlement costs and related legal expense
tax expenses, impairment charges and other non operating costs and
potential distraction or unusual expenses associated with our expansion into international markets or initiatives to expand new concepts.
Seasonal factors also cause our results to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. Our restaurant sales are typically lower during the winter months and the holiday season and during periods of inclement weather because fewer people are eating out and higher during the spring, summer and fall months for the opposite reason . Our restaurant sales will also vary as a result of the number of trading days x2014 that is, the number of days in a quarter when a restaurant is open.
Our anti takeover provisions may delay or prevent a change in control of us, which could adversely affect the price of our common stock.
As of December  31, 2015, there were 2,010 Chipotle and other concept restaurants in operation. The table below sets forth the locations by state or country of all restaurants in operation.
We categorize our restaurants as end caps at the end of a line of retail outlets , in lines in a line of retail outlets , free standing, or other. Of our restaurants in operation as of December  31, 2015, we had 1,231 end cap locations, 337 free standing units, 311 in line locations, and 131 other locations. The average restaurant size is about 2,530 square feet and seats about 58 people. Many of our restaurants also feature outdoor patio space.
We own 17 properties and operate restaurants on all of them.
For information regarding legal proceedings, see Note 10. x201C Commitments and Contingencies x201D in our consolidated financial statements included in Item  8. x201C Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. x201D
ITEM  5.MARKET FOR REGISTRANT x2019 S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
The following table describes the per share range of high and low sales prices for shares of our common stock for the quarterly periods indicated, as reported by the New York Stock Exchange x201C NYSE x201D . Our common stock trades on the NYSE under the symbol x201C CMG. x201D
As of January  29, 2016, there were approximately 1,030 holders of our common stock, as determined by counting our record holders and the number of participants reflected in a security position listing provided to us by the Depository Trust Company. Because such x201C DTC participants x201D are brokers and other institutions holding shares of our common stock on behalf of their customers, the actual number of unique shareholders represented by these record holders is not known.
The table below reflects shares of common stock we repurchased during the fourth quarter of 2015.
Total Number of Shares Purchased as Part of Publicly Announced Plans or Programs 1
Approximate Dollar Value of Shares that May Yet Be Purchased Under the Plans or Programs 2
1 Shares were repurchased pursuant to repurchase programs announced on February 3, 2015, July 21, 2015 and December 4, 2015.
2 This column includes 300 million in authorized repurchases announced on December 4, 2015, but does not include an additional 300 million in authorized repurchases announced on January 6, 2016, and 300 million in authorized repurchases announced on February 2, 2016.   Each repurchase program has no expiration date. Authorization of   repurchase programs may be modified, suspended, or discontinued at any time.
We are not required to pay any dividends and have not declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock. We intend to continue to retain earnings for use in the operation and expansion of our business and therefore do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
Our selected consolidated financial data shown below should be read together with Item  7. x201C Management x2019 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations x201D and our consolidated financial statements and respective notes included in Item  8 x201C Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. x201D The data shown below are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for any future period in thousands, except per share data .
ITEM  7.  MANAGEMENT x2019 S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In addition to the impact on sales, the food borne illness incidents resulted in non recurring expenses in the fourth quarter of 2015 of approximately 16.0 million, which includes food waste, impairment charges for kitchen equipment that will no longer be used, insurance claim estimates, increased marketing expenses, lab analysis of food samples and environmental swabs, and retaining expert advisory services related to epidemiology and food safety.
The following table details restaurant unit data for the years indicated.
Our results of operations as a percentage of revenue and period over period variances are discussed in the following section. As we open more restaurants and hire more employees, our restaurant operating costs and depreciation and amortization increase.
Number of restaurants as of the end of the period
Number of restaurants opened in the period, net of   relocations
In 2015, increased revenue  was primarily driven by new restaurant openings. Revenue from restaurants not yet in the comparable base contributed 390.4 million of the increase in sales in 2015, of which 183.6 million was attributable to restaurants opened during the year.
Food, beverage and packaging costs decreased as a percentage of revenue in 2015 primarily due to the benefit of the nation wide menu price increases taken in the second quarter of 2014 and relief in dairy and avocado costs. The decrease was partially offset by inflation on beef costs.
Food, beverage and packaging costs increased as a percentage of revenue in 2014 due to inflation on many food items, primarily beef, avocados, and dairy. The increase was partially offset by the impact of menu price increases.
Labor costs as a percentage of revenue increased in 2015 due primarily to wage inflation and an increased number of crew and managers in each of our restaurants caused by scheduling inefficiencies occurring earlier in the year. Based on expected lower average restaurant sales, we expect labor costs as a percentage of revenue to increase for 2016.
Labor costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in 2014 due primarily to the benefit of higher average restaurant sales, including the impact of menu price increases, partially offset by an increased number of managers and crew in our restaurants and normal wage inflation.
Occupancy costs as a percentage of revenue increased in 2015 primarily due to higher average rents for new locations.  Occupancy costs are expected to increase as a percentage of revenue during 2016 as a result of expected lower average restaurant sales.
In 2014, occupancy costs decreased as a percentage of revenue primarily due to the benefit of higher average restaurant sales on a partially fixed cost base.
Other operating costs decreased as a percentage of revenue in 2014 due primarily to the benefit of higher average restaurant sales on a partially fixed cost base.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in dollar terms in 2014 primarily resulted from increased non cash stock based compensation expense, higher payroll and bonus costs as we grew, as well as costs from our AMC held in the third quarter of 2014.
Depreciation and amortization increased as a percentage of revenue in 2015 due to reinvestment costs for our restaurants as they age.
In 2014, depreciation and amortization decreased as a percentage of revenue as a result of the benefit of higher average restaurant sales on a partially fixed cost base.
Loss on disposal of assets increased in 2015 due to impairment charges resulting from an internally developed software program that we chose not to implement and related hardware, the discontinued use of certain kitchen equipment as we move more food preparation to central kitchens, as well as restaurant relocations.  Loss on disposal of assets remained relatively consistent in 2014.
In 2015 and 2014, the effective tax rate was lower than 2013 because there was a decrease in the state tax rate. Additionally, 2014 included a benefit from filing the 2013 tax returns, which included a non recurring change in the estimate of usable employer credits. For 2016, we expect the effective tax rate to be 39.0 due to expected lower income before income taxes.
The following table presents data from the consolidated statement of income and comprehensive income for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December  31, 2015. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results for any subsequent quarter. Results from the quarter ended December 31, 2015 include the impact of the food borne illness incidents described elsewhere in this report, and these incidents are likely to impact our results in future quarters.
Our contractual obligations as of December  31, 2015 were as follows
1 We enter into various purchase obligations in the ordinary course of business. Those that are binding primarily relate to amounts owed for orders related to produce and other ingredients and supplies, construction contractor and subcontractor agreements, orders submitted for equipment for restaurants under construction, and marketing initiatives and corporate sponsorships.
As of December  31, 2015 and 2014, we had no off balance sheet arrangements or obligations.
We lease nearly all of our restaurant locations. Our leases typically contain escalating rentals over the lease term as well as optional renewal periods. We have estimated that our lease term, including reasonably assured renewal periods, is the lesser of the
lease term or 20 years.  We account for our leases by recognizing rent expense on a straight line basis over the reasonably assured lease term. The majority of our leasehold improvements are also depreciated over the reasonably assured lease term.  If the estimate of our reasonably assured lease term was changed, our depreciation and rent expense could differ materially.
Reserves Contingencies for Litigation and Other Matters
ITEM  7A.QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK
A portion of our operations consist of activities outside of the U.S. and we have currency risk on the transactions in other currencies and translation adjustments resulting from the conversion of our international financial results into the U.S. dollar. However, a substantial majority of our operations and investment activities are transacted in the U.S. and therefore our foreign currency risk is limited at this date.
ITEM  8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December  31, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statement of Income and Comprehensive Income for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statement of Shareholders x2019 Equity for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
In our opinion, the financial statements referred  to above present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. at December  31, 2015 and 2014, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December  31, 2015, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States , Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. x2019 s internal control over financial reporting as of December  31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 2013 framework and our report dated February  4, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of 1,176 and 1,199 as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively
Leasehold improvements, property and equipment, net
Preferred stock, 0.01 par value, 600,000 shares authorized, no shares issued as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively
Common stock 0.01 par value, 230,000 shares authorized, and 35,790 and 35,394 shares issued as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively
Treasury stock, at cost, 5,206 and 4,367 common shares at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Restaurant operating costs exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below
Other comprehensive income loss , net of income taxes
Unrealized loss on investments, net of income taxes of 946,  0, and 0
Other comprehensive income loss , net of income taxes
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDERS x2019 EQUITY
Excess tax benefit on stock based compensation, net of utilization of 29
Other comprehensive income loss , net of income tax
Other comprehensive income loss , net of income tax
Other comprehensive income loss , net of income tax
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities
Purchases of leasehold improvements, property and equipment
Stock plan transactions and other financing activities
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
Increase decrease in purchases of leasehold improvements, property and equipment accrued in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Increase in acquisition of treasury stock accrued in accrued liabilities
See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
dollar and share amounts in thousands, unless otherwise specified
1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company, including wholly and majority owned subsidiaries. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue from restaurant sales is recognized when payment is tendered at the point of sale. The Company reports revenue net of sales and use taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental taxing authorities.
The Company considers all highly liquid investment instruments purchased with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. The Company maintains cash and cash equivalent balances with financial institutions that exceed federally insured limits.   The Company has not experienced any losses related to these balances and believes the risk to be minimal.
Inventory, consisting principally of food, beverages, and supplies, is valued at the lower of first in, first out cost or market. Certain key ingredients beef, pork, chicken, beans, rice, sour cream, cheese, and tortillas are purchased from a small number of suppliers.
At least annually, the Company evaluates, and adjusts when necessary, the estimated useful lives of leasehold improvements, property and equipment. The changes in estimated useful lives did not have a material impact on depreciation in any period. The estimated useful lives are
Other assets consist primarily of restricted cash assets of 22,572 and 19,889 as of December  31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, a rabbi trust as described further in Note 7, x201C Employee Benefit Plans, x201D transferable liquor licenses which are carried at the lower of fair value or cost, and rental deposits related to leased properties. Restricted cash assets are primarily insurance related restricted trust assets.
discontinued use of certain kitchen equipment from the Company x2019 s restaurants, as well as restaurant relocations. Impairment charges for software and equipment write offs were equal to the net book value of assets on the balance sheet. Fair value of relocated restaurants was determined using Level 3 inputs as described below under x201C Fair Value Measurements x201D based on a discounted cash flows method through the estimated date of closure.
Pre opening costs, including rent, wages, benefits and travel for the training and opening teams, food and other restaurant operating costs, are expensed as incurred prior to a restaurant opening for business.
Advertising and marketing costs are expensed as incurred and totaled 69,257, 57,290 and 44,389 for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Advertising and marketing costs are included in other operating costs in the consolidated statement of income and comprehensive income.
Additionally, certain of the Company x2019 s operating leases contain clauses that provide additional contingent rent based on a percentage of sales greater than certain specified target amounts. The Company recognizes contingent rent expense provided the achievement of that target is considered probable.
The carrying value of the Company x2019 s cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts payable approximate fair value because of their short term nature.
Fair value is the price the Company would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability exit price in an orderly transaction between market participants. For assets and liabilities recorded or disclosed at fair value on a recurring basis, the Company determines fair value based on the following
Level 1 Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the entity has the ability to access.
Level 2 Observable inputs other than prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated with observable market data.
Level 3 Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities. This includes certain pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies and similar techniques that use significant unobservable inputs.
The Company x2019 s international operations generally use the local currency as the functional currency. Assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates in effect as of the balance sheet date. Income and expense accounts are translated at the average monthly exchange rates during the year. Resulting translation adjustments are recorded as a separate component of other comprehensive income loss in the consolidated statement of income and comprehensive income.
Leasehold improvements, property and equipment were as follows
of income and comprehensive income. The Company determined its investments approximated fair value as of December 31, 2014, and no impairment charges were recognized on the Company x2019 s investments for the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013.
The Company has elected to fund certain deferred compensation obligations through a rabbi trust, the assets of which are designated as trading securities, as described further in Note 7. x201C Employee Benefit Plans. x201D
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows
Actual taxes paid for each tax period were less than the current tax expense due to the excess tax benefit on stock based compensation of 74,442, 21,667, and 38,379 during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively.
The effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rates as follows
State income tax, net of related federal income tax benefit
In 2015 and 2014, the effective tax rate was lower than 2013 because there was a decrease in the state tax rate. Additionally, 2014 included a benefit from filing the 2013 tax returns, which included a non recurring change in the estimate of usable employer credits.
Deferred income tax liabilities are taxes the Company expects to pay in future periods. Similarly, deferred income tax assets are recorded for expected reductions in taxes payable in future periods. Deferred income taxes arise because of the differences in the book and tax bases of certain assets and liabilities. Deferred income tax liabilities and assets consist of the following
Stock based compensation and other employee benefits
Increase resulting from current year tax position
Stock based compensation recognized as capitalized development is included in leasehold improvements, property and equipment in the consolidated balance sheet. The following table sets forth stock based compensation expense, including SOSARs and stock awards
Stock based compensation expense recognized as capitalized development
The tables below summarize the option and SOSAR activity under the stock incentive plans in thousands, except years and per share data
Weighted Average Remaining Years of Contractual Life
Vested and expected to vest as of December  31, 2015
The following table reflects the average assumptions utilized in the Black Scholes option pricing model to value SOSAR awards granted for each year
Weighted average Black Scholes fair value per share at date of grant
The Company has not paid dividends to date and does not plan to pay dividends in the near future. The risk free interest rate is based upon U.S. Treasury rates for instruments with similar terms. The volatility assumption was based on the Company x2019 s historical data and implied volatility, and the expected life assumptions were based on the Company x2019 s historical data.
A summary of non vested stock award activity under the stock incentive plans is as follows in thousands, except per share data
The Company x2019 s measurement of the grant date fair value of the 2015 stock awards included using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates into the fair value determination the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied, using the following assumptions
Unearned compensation as of December  31, 2015 was 19,511 for non vested stock awards the Company has determined are probable of vesting, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.6 years. The fair value of shares earned as of the vesting date during the year ended December  31, 2015, 2014, and 2013 was 634,  783, and 58,941, respectively.
The Company maintains the Chipotle Mexican Grill 401 k Plan the x201C 401 k Plan x201D . The Company matches 100 of the first 3 of pay contributed by each eligible employee and 50 on the next 2 of pay contributed. Employees become eligible to receive matching contributions after one year of service with the Company. For the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, Company matching contributions totaled approximately 4,995, 3,881 and 2,644, respectively.
Unrealized gains losses on investments held in rabbi trust
Future minimum lease payments required under existing operating leases as of December  31, 2015 are as follows
Minimum lease payments have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of 6,217 due in the future under non cancelable subleases.
Total stock awards excluded from diluted earnings per share
The following table sets forth the computations of basic and diluted earnings per share
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
Diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding
The Company enters into various purchase obligations in the ordinary course of business, generally of short term nature. Those that are binding primarily relate to commitments for food purchases and supplies, amounts owed under contractor and subcontractor agreements, orders submitted for equipment for restaurants under construction, and marketing initiatives and corporate sponsorships.
Notices of Inspection of Work Authorization Documents and Related Civil and Criminal Investigations
to fully cooperate in the government x2019 s investigations. It is not possible at this time to determine whether the Company will incur, or to reasonably estimate the amount of, any fines, penalties or further liabilities in connection with these matters.
ITEM  9.CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management x2019 s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December  31, 2015, based on the framework set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal Control x2014 Integrated Framework the x201C 2013 framework x201D . Based on that assessment, management concluded that, as of December  31, 2015, our internal control over financial reporting was effective based on the criteria established in the 2013 framework.
Our independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst  amp Young LLP, has issued an attestation report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015. This report follows.
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December  31, 2015, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States , the consolidated balance sheets of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. as of December  31, 2015 and 2014, and the related consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income, shareholders x2019 equity and cash flows for each of  the three years in the period ended December  31, 2015 and our report dated February  4, 2016 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
ITEM  10.DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Incorporated by reference from the definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after December  31, 2015.
Incorporated by reference from the definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after December  31, 2015.
ITEM  12.SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
The following table presents information regarding options and rights outstanding under our equity compensation plans as of December  31, 2015. All options SOSARs reflected are options to purchase common stock.
a Number  of  Securitiesto be Issued UponExercise  of  OutstandingOptions and Rights 1
b Weighted AverageExercise Price ofOutstanding  Options  andRights 1
c Number  of  SecuritiesRemaining  Available  forFuture Issuance UnderEquity  Compensation  Plans excluding securitiesreflected in column a 2
Equity Compensation Plans Approved by Security Holders
Equity Compensation Plans Not Approved by Security Holders
1 Includes shares issuable in connection with awards with performance and market conditions, which will be issued based on achievement of performance criteria associated with the awards, with the number of shares issuable dependent on our level of performance. The weighted average exercise price in column b  includes the weighted average exercise price of SOSARs only.
Additional information for this item is incorporated by reference from the definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after December  31, 2015.
ITEM  13.CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Incorporated by reference from the definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after December  31, 2015.
Incorporated by reference from the definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120  days after December  31, 2015.
ITEM  15.EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
Consolidated financial statements filed as part of this report are listed under Item  8. x201C Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. x201D
No schedules are required because either the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the information required is included in the consolidated financial statements or the notes thereto.
The exhibits listed on the accompanying Exhibit Index are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this report.
Pursuant to the requirements of Section  13 or 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Co Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors
Description of Exhibit Incorporated Herein by Reference
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation
Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc.
Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. implementing simple majority voting
Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. removing plurality voting standard
Amended and Restated Bylaws of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc.
Form  of Stock Certificate for Shares of Common Stock
Amended and Restated Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. 2011 Stock Incentive Plan
Amended and Restated Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. 2006 Stock Incentive Plan
Form of 2011 Performance Based Stock Appreciation Rights Agreement
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. 2011 Stock Incentive Plan
Form of Performance Based Stock Appreciation Rights Agreement
Amendment No. 1 to Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. 2011 Stock Incentive Plan
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement dated January 31, 2006 among Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., McDonald x2019 s Corporation and certain shareholders
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. Supplemental Deferred Investment Plan
Amendment No. 1 to Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. Supplemental Deferred Investment Plan
Amendment No. 2 to Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. Supplemental Deferred Investment Plan
Form of Director and Officer Indemnification Agreement
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. 2014 Cash Incentive Plan
Consent of Ernst  amp Young LLP as the independent registered public accounting firm of Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc.
Power of Attorney included on signature page of this report
Certification of Chairman and Co Chief Executive Officer of Chipotle Mexican Grill,  Inc. pursuant to Section  302 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002
Certification of Co Chief Executive Officer of Chipotle Mexican Grill,  Inc. pursuant to Section  302 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002
Certification of Chief Financial Officer of Chipotle Mexican Grill,  Inc. pursuant to Section  302 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002
Certification of Co Chief Executive Officers and Chief Financial Officer of Chipotle Mexican Grill,  Inc. pursuant to Section  906 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002
x2020 denotes management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
One American Road, Dearborn, Michigan48126 Address of principal executive offices Zip Code 313 322 3000 Registrant 8217 s telephone number, including area code Securities registered pursuant to Section 12 b of the Act Title of each class  Name of each exchange on which registered Common Stock, par value
01 per share  New York Stock Exchange In addition, shares of Common Stock of Ford are listed on certain stock exchanges in Europe
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12 g of the Act   None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities  Act
Yes   R   No   oIndicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15 d of the  Act
Yes   o     No   RIndicate by check mark if the registrant 1 has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports , and 2 has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days
Yes   R    No   oIndicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation  S T 167 232
405 of this chapter during the preceding 12 months or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files
Yes   R    No   oIndicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S K 167 229
405 of this chapter is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant 8217 s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10 K or any amendment to this Form  10 K
o    Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company
See definitions of 8220 large accelerated filer, 8221 8220 accelerated filer, 8221 and 8220 smaller reporting company 8221 in Rule 12b 2 of the Exchange Act
Large accelerated filer R     Accelerated filer o     Non accelerated filer o Smaller reporting company o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company as defined in Rule 12b 2 of the Act
Yes   o    No   R  As of June 30, 2015, Ford had outstanding 3,899,403,544 shares of Common Stock and 70,852,076 shares of Class B Stock
Based on the New York Stock Exchange Composite Transaction closing price of the Common Stock on that date 15
01 per share , the aggregate market value of such Common Stock was 58,530,047,195
Although there is no quoted market for our Class B Stock, shares of Class B Stock may be converted at any time into an equal number of shares of Common Stock for the purpose of effecting the sale or other disposition of such shares of Common Stock
The shares of Common Stock and Class B Stock outstanding at June  30,  2015 included shares owned by persons who may be deemed to be 8220 affiliates 8221 of Ford
We do not believe, however, that any such person should be considered to be an affiliate
For information concerning ownership of outstanding Common Stock and Class B Stock, see the Proxy Statement for Ford 8217 s Annual Meeting of Stockholders currently scheduled to be held on May  12,  2016 our 8220 Proxy Statement 8221 , which is incorporated by reference under various Items of this Report as indicated below
As of February 4, 2016, Ford had outstanding 3,898,661,179 shares of Common Stock and 70,852,076 shares of Class B Stock
Based on the New York Stock Exchange Composite Transaction closing price of the Common Stock on that date 11
53 per share , the aggregate market value of such Common Stock was 44,951,563,394
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCEDocument  Where IncorporatedProxy Statement  Part III Items 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 As stated under various Items of this Report, only certain specified portions of such document are incorporated by reference in this Report
Ford Motor Company was incorporated in Delaware in 1919
We acquired the business of a Michigan company, also known as Ford Motor Company, which had been incorporated in 1903 to produce and sell automobiles designed and engineered by Henry Ford
We are a global automotive and mobility company based in Dearborn, Michigan
With about 199,000 employees and 67 plants worldwide, our core business includes designing, manufacturing, marketing, financing, and servicing a full line of Ford cars, trucks, SUVs, and electrified vehicles, as well as Lincoln luxury vehicles
At the same time, we are aggressively pursuing emerging opportunities through Ford Smart Mobility, our plan to be a leader in connectivity, mobility, autonomous vehicles, the customer experience, and data and analytics
We provide financial services through Ford Motor Credit Company LLC 8220 Ford Credit 8221
In addition to the information about Ford and our subsidiaries contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2015 8220 2015 Form 10 K Report 8221 or 8220 Report 8221 , extensive information about our Company can be found at http corporate
com, including information about our management team, our brands and products, and our corporate governance principles
The corporate governance information on our website includes our Corporate Governance Principles, Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Personnel, Code of Ethics for the Board of Directors, Code of Corporate Conduct for all employees, and the Charters for each of the Committees of our Board of Directors
In addition, any amendments to our Code of Ethics or waivers granted to our directors and executive officers will be posted on our corporate website
All of these documents may be accessed by going to our corporate website, or may be obtained free of charge by writing to our Shareholder Relations Department, Ford Motor Company, One  American Road, P
Our recent periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission 8220 SEC 8221 pursuant to Section 13 a or 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are available free of charge at http shareholder
This includes recent Annual Reports on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form  10 Q, and Current Reports on Form 8 K, as well as any amendments to those Reports
Recent Section  16 filings made with the SEC by the Company or any of our executive officers or directors with respect to our Common Stock also are made available free of charge through our website
We post each of these documents on our website as soon as reasonably practicable after it is electronically filed with the SEC
Our reports filed with the SEC also may be found on the SEC 8217 s website at www
The foregoing information regarding our website and its content is for convenience only and not deemed to be incorporated by reference into this Report nor filed with the SEC
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 OVERVIEWSegments
We review and present our business results in two sectors   Automotive and Financial Services
Within these sectors, our business is divided into reportable segments referred to herein as 8220 segments, 8221 8220 business units, 8221 or 8220 regions 8221 based on the organizational structure that we use to evaluate performance and make decisions on resource allocation, as well as availability and materiality of separate financial results consistent with that structure
The reportable segments within our Automotive and Financial Services sectors at December  31,  2015 were as described in the table below Business SectorReportable SegmentsDescriptionAutomotive North AmericaPrimarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in North America the United States, Canada, and Mexico , together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories
South AmericaPrimarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, service parts, and accessories in South America, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories
EuropePrimarily includes the sale of Ford vehicles, components, service parts, and accessories in Europe, Turkey, and Russia, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories
Middle East amp AfricaPrimarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Middle East and Africa, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories
Asia PacificPrimarily includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln vehicles, service parts, and accessories in the Asia Pacific region, together with the associated costs to develop, manufacture, distribute, and service the vehicles, parts, and accessories
Financial Services Ford CreditPrimarily includes vehicle related financing and leasing activities
AUTOMOTIVE SECTORGeneralOur vehicle brands are Ford and Lincoln
In 2015, we sold approximately 6,635,000  vehicles at wholesale throughout the world
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 8221 8220 Item 7 8221 for discussion of our calculation of wholesale unit volumes
Substantially all of our vehicles, parts, and accessories are sold through distributors and dealers collectively, 8220 dealerships 8221 , the substantial majority of which are independently owned
At December  31,  2015, the approximate number of dealerships worldwide distributing our vehicle brands was as follows BrandNumber of Dealerships at December 31, 2015Ford10,727Ford Lincoln combined 884Lincoln360Total11,971We do not depend on any single customer or a few customers to the extent that the loss of such customers would have a material adverse effect on our business
In addition to the products we sell to our dealerships for retail sale, we also sell vehicles to our dealerships for sale to fleet customers, including commercial fleet customers, daily rental car companies, and governments
We also sell parts and accessories, primarily to our dealerships which in turn sell these products to retail customers and to authorized parts distributors which in turn primarily sell these products to retailers
The worldwide automotive industry is affected significantly by general economic conditions over which we have little control
Vehicles are durable goods, and consumers have latitude in determining whether and when to replace an existing vehicle
The decision whether to purchase a vehicle may be affected significantly by slowing economic growth, 2Item 1
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 geopolitical events, and other factors including the cost of purchasing and operating cars and trucks and the availability and cost of financing and fuel
As we have seen in the United States and Europe, in particular, the number of cars and trucks sold may vary substantially from year to year
Further, the automotive industry is a highly competitive business that has a wide and growing variety of product offerings from a growing number of manufacturers
Our wholesale unit volumes vary with the level of total industry demand and our share of that industry demand
Our wholesale unit volumes also are influenced by the level of dealer inventory
Our share is influenced by how our products are perceived in comparison to those offered by other manufacturers based on many factors, including price, quality, styling, reliability, safety, fuel efficiency, functionality, and reputation
Our share also is affected by the timing and frequency of new model introductions
Our ability to satisfy changing consumer preferences with respect to type or size of vehicle, as well as design and performance characteristics, affects our sales and earnings significantly
The decline in the value of the yen during the past four years also has contributed significantly to competitive pressures in many of our markets
For the past several decades, manufacturers typically have given price discounts and other marketing incentives to maintain market share and production levels
A discussion of our strategies to compete in this pricing environment is set forth in the 8220 Overview 8221 section in Item  7
The worldwide automotive industry consists of many producers, with no single dominant producer
Certain manufacturers, however, account for the major percentage of total sales within particular countries, especially their countries of origin
Key competitors with global presence include Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, General Motors Company, Honda Motor Company, Hyundai Kia Automotive Group, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault Nissan B
, Suzuki Motor Corporation, Toyota Motor Corporation, and Volkswagen AG Group
We generally record the sale of a vehicle and recognize revenue when it is produced and shipped or delivered to our customer i
See the 8220 Overview 8221 section in Item  7 for additional discussion of revenue recognition practices
We manage our vehicle production schedule based on a number of factors, including retail sales i
, units sold by our dealerships to their customers at retail and dealer stock levels i
, the number of units held in inventory by our dealerships for sale to their customers
Historically, we have experienced some seasonal fluctuation in the business, with production in many markets tending to be higher in the first half of the year to meet demand in the spring and summer typically the strongest sales months of the year
We purchase a wide variety of raw materials from numerous suppliers around the world for use in production of our vehicles
, steel, iron castings, and aluminum , precious metals e
We believe we have adequate supplies or sources of availability of raw materials necessary to meet our needs
There always are risks and uncertainties with respect to the supply of raw materials, however, which could impact availability in sufficient quantities to meet our needs
See the 8220 Overview 8221 section of Item  7 for a discussion of commodity and energy price trends, and 8220 Item  7A
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk 8221 8220 Item 7A 8221 for a discussion of commodity price risks
We generally produce and ship our products on average within approximately 20 days after an order is deemed to become firm
Therefore, no significant amount of backlog orders accumulates during any period
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 Intellectual Property
We own or hold licenses to use numerous patents, copyrights, and trademarks on a global basis
Our policy is to protect our competitive position by, among other methods, filing U
and international patent applications to protect technology and improvements that we consider important to the development of our business
We have generated a large number of patents, and expect this portfolio to continue to grow as we actively pursue additional technological innovation
We have approximately 38,500 active patents and pending patent applications globally, with an average age for patents in our active patent portfolio of just over five years
In addition to this intellectual property, we also rely on our proprietary knowledge and ongoing technological innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position
Although we believe these patents, patent applications, and know how, in the aggregate, are important to the conduct of our business, and we obtain licenses to use certain intellectual property owned by others, none is individually considered material to our business
We also own numerous trademarks and service marks that contribute to the identity and recognition of our Company and its products and services globally
Certain of these marks are integral to the conduct of our business, a loss of any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business
Warranty Coverage, Field Service Actions, and Customer Satisfaction Actions
Warranties are offered for specific periods of time and or mileage, and vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale
Pursuant to these warranties, we will repair, replace, or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory supplied materials or workmanship during the specified warranty period
In addition to the costs associated with this warranty coverage provided on our vehicles, we also incur costs as a result of field service actions i
, safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns , and for customer satisfaction actions
For additional information regarding warranty and related costs, see 8220 Critical Accounting Estimates 8221 in Item  7 and Note  27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
3  1,530  1,387  1,317                   Middle East amp Africa4
3  N A  N A  N ATotal CompanyN A  N A  N A  N A  N A  N A  6,635  6,323  6,330 a Industry volume is an internal estimate based on publicly available data collected from various government, private, and public sources around the globe and is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations
b Market share represents reported retail sales of our brands as a percent of total industry volume in the relevant market or region
Market share is based, in part, on estimated vehicle registrations includes medium and heavy trucks
c Wholesale unit volume includes sales of medium and heavy trucks
Wholesale unit volume includes all Ford and Lincoln badged units whether produced by Ford or by an unconsolidated affiliate that are sold to dealerships, units manufactured by Ford that are sold to other manufacturers, units distributed for other manufacturers, and local brand units produced by our unconsolidated Chinese joint venture Jiangling Motors Corporation, Ltd
Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option i
, rental repurchase , as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred e
, consignments , also are included in wholesale unit volume
Revenue from certain vehicles in wholesale unit volume specifically, Ford badged vehicles produced and distributed by our unconsolidated affiliates, as well as JMC brand vehicles are not included in our revenue
We previously reported these amounts on a Europe 20 basis, which consisted of Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom
e China industry volume and market share for years shown above are based on estimated wholesales
In 2016, we will begin using estimated vehicle registrations as a basis for calculating industry volume and market share
China industry volume, based on estimated vehicle registrations, was 23
f ASEAN includes Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia
g Asia Pacific market share includes Ford brand and JMC brand vehicles produced and sold by our unconsolidated affiliates
The predominant share of Ford Credit 8217 s business consists of financing our vehicles and supporting our dealers
Ford Credit earns its revenue primarily from payments made under retail installment sale and lease contracts that it originates and purchases interest rate supplements and other support payments from us and our subsidiaries and payments made under dealer financing programs
As a result of these financing activities, Ford Credit has a large portfolio of finance receivables and operating leases which it classifies into two portfolios 8212 8220 consumer 8221 and 8220 non consumer
8221   Finance receivables and operating leases in the consumer portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of our vehicles from dealers for personal and commercial use
Retail financing includes retail installment sale contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases for new vehicles to retail and commercial customers including leasing companies, government entities, daily rental companies, and fleet customers
Finance receivables in the non consumer portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers
Ford Credit makes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory i
, floorplan financing , as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer vehicle programs
Ford Credit also purchases receivables generated by us and our subsidiaries, primarily related to the sale of parts and accessories to dealers, receivables from Ford related loans, and certain used vehicles from daily rental fleet companies
Ford Credit does business in the United States and Canada through business centers
Outside of the United States, Europe is Ford Credit 8217 s largest operation
Ford Credit 8217 s European operations are managed through its United Kingdom based subsidiary, FCE Bank plc 8220 FCE 8221
Within Europe, FCE 8217 s largest markets are the United Kingdom and Germany, representing 67 of FCE 8217 s finance receivables and operating leases
See Item 7A for discussion of how Ford Credit manages its financial market risks
We routinely sponsor special retail and lease incentives to dealers 8217 customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit
In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease payments offered to the retail customer, we pay the value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract
These programs increase Ford Credit 8217 s financing volume and share
See Note  2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information about our accounting for these programs
On April 30, 2015, we entered into an Amended and Restated Relationship Agreement with Ford Credit, pursuant to which, if Ford Credit 8217 s managed leverage for a calendar quarter were to be higher than 11
5 1 as reported in its most recent periodic report , Ford Credit could require us to make or cause to be made a capital contribution to it in an amount sufficient to have caused such managed leverage to have been 11
No capital contributions have been made pursuant to this agreement
The agreement also limits to 3  billion the amount Ford Credit may borrow under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015
In a separate agreement with FCE, Ford Credit also has agreed to maintain FCE 8217 s net worth in excess of 500  million  no payments have been made pursuant to that agreement
In addition, manufacturing and other automotive assembly facilities in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are subject to stringent standards regulating air emissions, water discharges, and the handling and disposal of hazardous substances
The most significant of the standards and regulations affecting us are discussed below Vehicle Emissions ControlU
The federal Clean Air Act imposes stringent limits on the amount of regulated pollutants that lawfully may be emitted by new vehicles and engines produced for sale in the United States
Environmental Protection Agency 8220 EPA 8221 finalized new 8220 Tier 3 8221 regulations that phase in increasingly stringent motor vehicle emission standards beginning with the 2017 model year compliance with these standards could be challenging
Compliance with automobile emission standards depends in part on the widespread availability of high quality and consistent automotive fuels that the vehicles were designed to use
Fuel variables that can affect vehicle emissions include ethanol content, octane ratings, and the use of metallic based fuel additives, among other things
There are various ongoing regulatory and judicial proceedings related to fuel quality at the national and state level, and the outcome of these proceedings could affect vehicle manufacturers 8217 warranty costs as well as their ability to comply with vehicle emission standards
Requirements 8211 32 California and Other State Emission Standards
Pursuant to the Clean Air Act, California may establish its own unique vehicle emission standards the California standards can also be adopted by other states
The California Air Resources Board 8220 CARB 8221 has adopted 8220 LEV III 8221 standards, which took effect with the 2015 model year and impose increasingly stringent tailpipe and evaporative emissions requirements for light and medium duty vehicles
Thirteen states, primarily located in the Northeast and Northwest, have adopted the LEV III standards
The California vehicle emissions program also includes requirements for manufacturers to produce and deliver for sale zero emission vehicles 8220 ZEVs 8221
The current ZEV regulations mandate substantial annual increases in the production and sale of battery electric, fuel cell, and plug in hybrid vehicles, particularly for the 2018 8211 2025 model years
By the 2025 model year, approximately 15 of a manufacturer 8217 s total California sales volume will need to be made up of such vehicles
Compliance with ZEV rules could have a substantial adverse effect on our sales volumes and profits
We are concerned that the market and infrastructure in California may not support the large volume of advanced technology vehicles that manufacturers will be required to produce, especially if gasoline prices remain relatively low
We also are concerned about enforcement of the ZEV mandate in other states that have adopted California 8217 s ZEV program, where the existence of a market for such vehicles is even less certain
CARB conducts periodic reviews of its upcoming ZEV requirements, taking into account factors such as technology developments and market acceptance
Ford and the industry will be active participants in such reviews, with the goal of ensuring that ZEV requirements are feasible and not excessively burdensome
European Union 8220 EU 8221 directives and related legislation limit the amount of regulated pollutants that may be emitted by new motor vehicles and engines sold in the EU
Stringent new Stage 6 emission standards took effect for vehicle registrations starting in September  2014, with a second phase beginning in September  2017
These  standards will drive the need for additional diesel exhaust after treatment, which will add cost and potentially impact the diesel CO2 32 advantage
The European Commission has also proposed new Real Driving Emission RDE rules, which will require manufacturers to conduct on road emission tests using portable emission analyzers
These on road emission tests will complement the laboratory based tests
During the initial phase, which started in January 2016, the RDE tests are used for monitoring purposes
Beginning in September 2017, manufacturers will have to reduce the divergence between the regulatory limit that is tested in laboratory conditions and the values of RDE tests 8220 conformity factors 8221
The additional costs associated with conducting the RDE tests and complying with the conformity factors are expected to be significant
Many countries, in an effort to address air quality concerns, are adopting previous versions of European or United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 8220 UN ECE 8221 mobile source emission regulations
Some countries have adopted more advanced regulations based on the most recent version of European or U
regulations for example, China adopted emission regulations for large cities based on European Stage V emission standards
based standards for gasoline vehicles and European based standards for diesel vehicles
Although these countries have adopted regulations based on UN ECE or U
standards, there may be some unique testing provisions that require emission control systems to be redesigned for 7Item 1
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 these markets
Canadian criteria emissions regulations are aligned with U
In July 2015, the Canadian federal government amended the On Road Vehicle and Engine Emission Regulations 32 and the Sulphur in Gasoline Regulations to align Canadian emission standards with the U
Not all countries have adopted appropriate fuel quality standards to accompany the stringent emission standards adopted
This could lead to compliance problems, particularly if on board diagnostic or in use surveillance requirements are implemented
Brazil and Chile have introduced stringent emission and on board diagnostic standards based on the European Stage 5 standards for light duty vehicles and Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles
In Brazil, more stringent on board diagnostic standards for diesel light duty vehicles will be introduced in 2017
Argentina is phasing in European Stage 5 standards for all new light duty vehicle registrations by 2017 and European Stage V standards for heavy duty vehicles by 2018
In September 2015, the EPA and CARB announced that they were investigating a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of 8220 defeat devices 8221 in hundreds of thousands of light duty diesel vehicles
The announcement triggered similar investigations of the competitor by regulators in other countries
Defeat devices are elements of design typically embedded in software that improperly cause the emission control system to function less effectively during normal on road driving than during an official laboratory emissions test, without justification
They are prohibited by law in many jurisdictions, including the United States and Europe
The investigations by the EPA and CARB of our competitor have led to increased scrutiny of automakers 8217 emission testing by regulators around the world
The EPA began carrying out additional non standard tests as part of its vehicle certification program, following an announcement in September 2015
The EU accelerated efforts to finalize its RDE testing program as described above
Several European countries, including France and Germany, are conducting non standard emission tests and meeting with manufacturers to discuss the results
Vehicle Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas StandardsU
32 Federal law requires that light duty vehicles meet minimum corporate average fuel economy 8220 CAFE 8221 standards set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 8220 NHTSA 8221
Manufacturers are subject to substantial civil penalties if they fail to meet the CAFE standard in any model year, after taking into account all available credits for the preceding three model years and expected credits for the five succeeding model years
The law requires NHTSA to promulgate and enforce separate CAFE standards applicable to each manufacturer 8217 s fleet of domestic passenger cars, imported passenger cars, and light duty trucks
The EPA also regulates vehicle greenhouse gas 8220 GHG 8221 emissions under the Clean Air Act
Because the vast majority of GHGs emitted by a vehicle are the result of fuel combustion, GHG emission standards effectively are fuel economy standards
Thus, it is necessary for NHTSA and EPA to coordinate with each other on their fuel economy and GHG standards, respectively, to avoid potential inconsistencies
In 2010, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations establishing the 8220 One National Program 8221 of CAFE and GHG regulations for light duty vehicles for the 2012 2016 model years
In 2012, EPA and NHTSA jointly promulgated regulations extending the One National Program framework through the 2025 model year
These rules require manufacturers to achieve, across the industry, a light duty fleet average fuel economy of approximately 35
5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54
Each manufacturer 8217 s specific task depends on the mix of vehicles it sells
The rules include the opportunity for manufacturers to earn credits for technologies that achieve real world CO2 32 reductions, and fuel economy improvements that are not captured by EPA fuel economy test procedures
Manufacturers also can earn credits for GHG reductions not specifically tied to fuel economy, such as improvements in air conditioning systems
The One National Program standards become increasingly stringent over time, and they will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel efficient vehicles in large numbers
The rules provide for a midterm evaluation process under which, by 2018, EPA and NHTSA will re evaluate their standards for model years 2022 8211 2025 in order to ensure that those standards are feasible and optimal in light of intervening events
We are particularly concerned about the commercial feasibility of meeting the 2022 8211 2025 model year GHG and CAFE standards, and therefore the midterm evaluation process is very important to Ford and the auto industry
Ford 8217 s ability to comply with the 2022 8211 2025 model year standards remains unclear because of the many unknowns regarding technology development, market conditions, and other factors so far 8Item 1
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 into the future
We intend to be an active participant in the midterm evaluation process for these standards
Our concern about the feasibility of the fuel economy and GHG standards also extends to some of the pre 2022 model year standards, which are not covered by the midterm evaluation
If the agencies seek to impose and enforce fuel economy and GHG standards that are misaligned with market conditions, we likely would be forced to take various actions that could have substantial adverse effects on our sales volume and profits
Such actions likely would include restricting offerings of selected engines and popular options increasing market support programs for our most fuel efficient cars and light trucks and ultimately curtailing the production and sale of certain vehicles such as high performance cars, utilities, and or full size light trucks, in order to maintain compliance
California has asserted the right to regulate motor vehicle GHG emissions, and other states have asserted the right to adopt the California standards
With the adoption of the federal One National Program standards discussed above, California and the other states have agreed that compliance with the federal program would satisfy compliance with any purported state GHG requirements for the 2012 8211 2025 model years
This avoids a patchwork of potentially conflicting federal and state GHG standards
Should California and other states ever renew their efforts to enforce state specific motor vehicle GHG rules, this would impose significant costs on automotive manufacturers
EPA and NHTSA have jointly promulgated GHG and fuel economy standards on heavy duty vehicles generally, vehicles over 8,500  pounds gross vehicle weight rating
In our case, the standards primarily affect our heavy duty pickup trucks and vans, plus vocational vehicles such as shuttle buses and delivery trucks
EPA and NHTSA are expected to finalize new rules in 2016 setting GHG and fuel economy standards for these vehicles, covering model years 2019 8211 2027
As the heavy duty standards increase in stringency, it may become more difficult to comply while continuing to offer a full lineup of heavy duty trucks
32 32 In December 2008, the EU approved regulation of passenger car CO2 32 emissions beginning in 2012 that limits the industry fleet average to a maximum of 130 grams per kilometer 8220 g km 8221 , using a sliding scale based on vehicle weight
This regulation provides different targets for each manufacturer based on the respective average vehicle weight for its fleet of vehicles
Limited credits are available for CO2 32 off cycle actions 8220 eco innovations 8221 , certain alternative fuels, and vehicles with CO2 32 emissions below 50 g km
A penalty system will apply for manufacturers failing to meet targets, with fees ranging from 8364 5 to 8364 95 per vehicle per g km shortfall in the years 2012 8211 2018, and 8364 95  per  g km shortfall beginning in 2019
Pooling agreements between different manufacturers are possible, although it is not clear that these will be of much practical benefit under the regulations
Starting in 2020, an industry target of 95 g km has been set
Other non EU European countries are likely to follow with similar regulations
For example, Switzerland has introduced similar rules, which began phasing in starting in July 2012 with the same targets which likely also will include a 2020 target of 95 g km , although the industry average emission target is significantly higher
We face the risk of advance premium payment requirements if, for example, unexpected market fluctuation within a quarter negatively impact our average fleet performance
In separate legislation, 8220 complementary measures 8221 have been mandated, including requirements related to fuel economy indicators, and more efficient low CO2 32 mobile air conditioning systems
The EU Commission, Council and Parliament have approved a target for commercial light duty vehicles to be at an industry average of 175 g km with phase in from 2014 8211 2017 , and 147 g km in 2020  it is likely that other European countries, like Switzerland, will implement similar rules but under even more difficult conditions
This regulation also provides different targets for each manufacturer based on its respective average vehicle weight in its fleet of vehicles
The final mass and CO2 32 requirements for 8220 multi stage vehicles 8221 e
, our Transit chassis cabs are fully allocated to the base manufacturer e
, Ford so that the base manufacturer is fully responsible for the CO2 32 performance of the final up fitted vehicles
The EU proposal also includes a penalty system, 8220 super credits 8221 for vehicles below 50  g km, and limited credits for CO2 32 off cycle eco innovations, pooling, etc
The United Nations has a project underway to develop a new technical regulation for passenger car emissions and CO2
32 This new world light duty test procedure 8220 WLTP 8221 is focused primarily on better aligning laboratory CO2 32 and fuel consumption figures with customer reported figures
The introduction of WLTP in Europe is likely to require updates to CO2 32 labeling as early as 2018 and could increase certain consumer label values
Costs associated with new or incremental testing for WLTP could be significant
The European Commission continues to apply political pressure for mandatory WLTP testing for regulated emissions and CO2 32 32 starting in September 2017
The European Commission has assured equivalent stringency to the existing fleet average rules for each automobile manufacturer if the 2020 fleet average targets are required to be measured on WLTP instead of under the current European New European Driving Cycle 8220 NEDC 8221 requirements
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 Some European countries have implemented or are considering other initiatives for reducing CO2 32 vehicle emissions, including fiscal measures and CO2 32 labeling
For example, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands, among others, have introduced taxation based on CO2 32 emissions
The EU CO2 32 requirements are likely to trigger further measures
To limit GHG emissions, the EU directive on mobile air conditioning currently requires the replacement of the current refrigerant with a lower 8220 global warming potential 8221 refrigerant for new vehicle types, and for all newly registered vehicles starting in January 2017
A refrigerant change adds considerable costs along the whole manufacturing chain
The Canadian federal government has regulated vehicle GHG emissions under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, beginning with the 2011 model year
EPA GHG regulations for the 2012 8211 2016 model years
In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the final changes to the regulation for light duty vehicles, which maintain alignment with U
EPA vehicle GHG standards for the 2017 8211 2025 model years
The final regulation for 2014 8211 2018 heavy duty vehicles was published in February 2013
In October 2014, the Canadian federal government published the Notice of Intent to regulate heavy duty vehicles and engines for model year 2019 and beyond, which tracks U
Mexico adopted fuel economy CO2 32 standards, based on the U
One National Program framework, that took effect in 2014
Many Asia Pacific countries such as Australia, China, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam are developing or enforcing fuel efficiency or labeling targets
For example, South Korea has set fuel efficiency targets for 2020, with incentives for early adoption
China published standards for Stage IV fuel efficiency targets for 2016 8211 2020
The fuel efficiency targets will impact the cost of vehicle technology in the future
In South America, Brazil introduced a voluntary vehicle energy efficiency labeling program, indicating fuel consumption rates for all light duty vehicles
Brazil has required inclusion of emission classification on fuel economy labels since January 2016
Brazil also published a new automotive regime establishing a minimum absolute CAFE value as a function of Fleet Corporate Average Mass for 2017 light duty vehicles with a spark ignition engine in order to qualify for industrialized products tax reduction
Additional tax reductions are available if further fuel efficiency improvements are achieved
A severe penalty system will apply to qualified manufacturers failing to meet fuel efficiency requirements for the 2013 8211 2017 sales period
Brazil reduced import tax on electric and hybrid cars
The tax rate, which was 35 , will vary from zero to 7 , depending on a vehicle 8217 s energy efficiency
Chile introduced a tax based on urban fuel consumption and NOx emission for light and medium vehicles beginning in late 2014
In general, fuel efficiency targets may impact the cost of technology of our models in the future
In the Middle East, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia introduced new light duty vehicle fuel economy standards, which are patterned after the U
CAFE standard structure, with fuel economy targets following the design of the U
The standards became effective on January 1, 2016 and will be fully phased in by the end of 2017
32 32 The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 the 8220 Safety Act 8221 regulates vehicles and vehicle equipment in two primary ways
First, the Safety Act prohibits the sale in the United States of any new vehicle or equipment that does not conform to applicable vehicle safety standards established by NHTSA
Meeting or exceeding many safety standards is costly, in part because the standards tend to conflict with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet emission and fuel economy standards
Second, the Safety Act requires that defects related to motor vehicle safety be remedied through safety recall campaigns
A manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard
Should we or NHTSA determine that either a safety defect or noncompliance issue exists with respect to any of our vehicles, the cost of such recall campaigns could be substantial
The EU and many countries have established vehicle safety standards and regulations, and are likely to adopt additional or more stringent requirements in the future
The European General Safety Regulation introduced United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 8220 UN ECE 8221 regulations, which will be required for the European Type Approval process
EU regulators also are focusing on active safety features such as lane departure warning systems, electronic stability control, and automatic brake assist
Globally, governments generally have been adopting UN ECE based regulations with minor variations to address local concerns
Any difference between North American and UN ECE based regulations can add complexity and costs to the development of global platform vehicles, and we continue to support efforts to harmonize regulations to reduce vehicle design complexity while providing a common level of safety performance several recently launched bilateral negotiations on free trade can potentially contribute to this goal
New safety and recall requirements in China, India, and Gulf Cooperation Council countries also 10Item 1
Business Continued                                                             32 32                                 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 may add substantial costs and complexity to our global recall practice
In South America, additional safety requirements are being introduced or proposed in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay, influenced by The New Car Assessment Programme for Latin America and the Caribbean 8220 Latin NCAP 8221 , which may be a driver for similar actions in other countries
In Canada, regulatory requirements are currently aligned with U
However, recent amendments to the Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Act have introduced broad powers to the Minister of Transport to order manufacturers to submit a notice of defect or non compliance when the Minister considers it would be in the interest of safety
EMPLOYMENT DATAThe approximate number of individuals employed by us and entities that we consolidated as of December  31,  2015 and 2014 was as follows in thousands  2015  2014Automotive    North America96  90South America15  16Europe a 53  47Middle East amp Africa3  3Asia Pacific25  25Financial Services    Ford Credit7  6Total199  187 a 2015 includes employees of Ford Sollers, our joint venture in Russia that was consolidated effective March 31, 2015
The year over year increase in employment primarily reflects hiring in North America to support product led growth initiatives and increased vehicle production
Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements
In the United States, approximately 99 of these unionized hourly employees in our Automotive sector are represented by the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America 8220 UAW 8221 or 8220 United Auto Workers 8221
Many non management salaried employees at our operations outside of the United States also are represented by unions
In 2015, we entered into a four year collective bargaining agreement with the UAW covering approximately 53,000 employees in the United States
The terms of the agreement provide us with opportunities to improve our productivity and put us on common footing with our domestic competitors regarding labor cost structure
Overall, including the ratification and lump sum bonuses, our U
labor costs are expected to increase by less than 1
In 2015, we also entered into collective bargaining agreements covering wages, benefits and or other employment provisions with unions in Argentina, Brazil, France, Germany, India, Mexico, New Zealand, Romania, Taiwan, Thailand and the United Kingdom
In 2016, we will negotiate collective bargaining agreements covering wages, benefits and or other employment provisions with unions in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, Romania, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan and Thailand
ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENTWe engage in engineering, research, and development primarily to improve the performance including fuel efficiency , safety, and customer satisfaction of our products, and to develop new products
Engineering, research, and development expenses for 2015, 2014, and 2013 were 6
We have listed below not necessarily in order of importance or probability of occurrence the most significant risk factors applicable to us Decline in industry sales volume, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors
Because we, like other manufacturers, have a high proportion of relatively fixed structural costs, relatively small changes in industry sales volume can have a substantial effect on our cash flow and profitability
If industry vehicle sales were to decline to levels significantly below our planning assumption, particularly in the United States, Europe, or China, due to financial crisis, recession, geopolitical events, or other factors, such as occurred during 2008 and 2009, our financial condition and results of operations would be substantially adversely affected
For discussion of economic trends, see the 8220 Overview 8221 section of Item  7
Decline in Ford 8217 s market share or failure to achieve growth
32 32 To maintain competitive economies of scale and grow our global market share, we must grow our market share in fast growing newly developed and emerging markets, particularly in our Asia Pacific region and our Middle East amp Africa region, as well as maintain or grow market share in mature markets
Our market share in certain growing markets, such as China, is lower than it is in our mature markets
A significant decline in our market share in mature markets or failure to achieve growth in newly developing or emerging markets, whether due to capacity constraints, competitive pressures, protectionist trade policies, or other factors, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
Lower than anticipated market acceptance of Ford 8217 s new or existing products or services
Although we conduct extensive market research before launching new or refreshed vehicles and introducing new services, many factors both within and outside our control affect the success of new or existing products and services in the marketplace
Offering vehicles and services that customers want and value can mitigate the risks of increasing price competition and declining demand, but products and services that are perceived to be less desirable whether in terms of price, quality, styling, safety, overall value, fuel efficiency, or other attributes can exacerbate these risks
The success of Ford Smart Mobility, our plan for connectivity, mobility, autonomous vehicles, the customer experience, and data and analytics, likewise depends on many factors, including the amount of capital we invest, advancements in technology, regulatory changes, and other factors that are difficult to predict that may significantly affect the future of mobility
With increased consumer interconnectedness through the internet, social media, and other media, mere allegations relating to quality, safety, fuel efficiency, corporate social responsibility, or other key attributes can negatively impact our reputation or market acceptance of our products or services, even where such allegations prove to be inaccurate or unfounded
Market shift away from sales of larger, more profitable vehicles beyond Ford 8217 s current planning assumption, particularly in the United States
32 32 A shift in consumer preferences away from larger, more profitable vehicles at levels beyond our current planning assumption could result in an immediate and substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations
An increase in or continued volatility of fuel prices, or reduced availability of fuel
32 32 An increase in fuel prices, continued price volatility, or reduced availability of fuel, particularly in the United States, could result in weakening of demand for relatively more profitable large cars, utilities, and trucks, while increasing demand for relatively less profitable small vehicles
Continuation or acceleration of such a trend beyond our current planning assumption, or volatility in demand across segments, could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Continued or increased price competition resulting from industry excess capacity, currency fluctuations, or other factors
32 32 The global automotive industry is intensely competitive, with manufacturing capacity far exceeding current demand
According to the December 2015 report issued by IHS Automotive, the global automotive industry is estimated to have had excess capacity of about 31 million units in 2015
Industry overcapacity has resulted in many manufacturers offering marketing incentives on vehicles in an attempt to maintain and grow market share these incentives historically have included a combination of subsidized financing or leasing programs, price rebates, and other incentives
As a result, we are not necessarily able to set our prices to offset higher costs of marketing incentives, commodity or other cost increases, or the impact of adverse currency fluctuations, including pricing advantages foreign competitors may have because of their weaker home market currencies
Continuation of or increased excess capacity could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates
As a resource intensive manufacturing operation, we are exposed to a variety of market and asset risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates
These risks affect our Automotive and Financial Services sectors
We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which recognizes the unpredictability of markets and seeks to reduce potentially adverse effects on our business
Nevertheless, changes in currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates cannot always be predicted or hedged
In addition, because of intense price competition and our high level of fixed costs, we may not be able to address such changes even if foreseeable
As a result, substantial unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, or interest rates could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
See 8220 Overview 8221 to Item 7 and Item 7A for additional discussion of currency, commodity price, and interest rate risks
Adverse effects resulting from economic, geopolitical, or other events
32 32 With the increasing interconnectedness of global economic and financial systems, a financial crisis, natural disaster, geopolitical crisis, or other significant event in one area of the world can have an immediate and devastating impact on markets around the world
For example, the financial crisis that began in the United States in 2008 quickly spread to other markets natural disasters in Japan and Thailand during 2011 caused production interruptions and delays not just in Asia Pacific but other regions around the world and episodes of increased geopolitical tensions or acts of terrorism have at times caused adverse reactions that may spread to economies around the globe
Concerns persist regarding the sustainability of the European currency area 8220 euro area 8221 and of the larger European Union, which includes the United Kingdom
electorate on whether to remain in the European Union has exacerbated concerns regarding the overall stability of the European Union, given the diverse economic and political circumstances of individual euro area countries
If a country within the euro area were to default on its debt or withdraw from the euro currency, or 8212 in a more extreme circumstance 8212 the euro currency were to be dissolved entirely, the impact on markets around the world, and on Ford 8217 s global business, could be immediate and significant
The exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union would have less extreme but still significant implications
Such scenarios 8212 or the perception that such developments are imminent 8212 could adversely affect the value of our euro and pound denominated assets and obligations
In addition, such developments could cause financial and capital markets within and outside Europe to constrict, thereby negatively impacting our ability to finance our business, and also could cause a substantial dip in consumer confidence and spending that could negatively impact sales of vehicles
Any one of these impacts could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
In addition, we have operations in various markets with volatile economic or political environments and are pursuing growth opportunities in a number of newly developed and emerging markets
These investments may expose us to heightened risks of economic, geopolitical, or other events, including governmental takeover i
, nationalization of our manufacturing facilities or intellectual property, restrictive exchange or import controls, disruption of operations as a result of systemic political or economic instability, outbreak of war or expansion of hostilities, and acts of terrorism, each of which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
government, other governments and international organizations could impose additional sanctions that could restrict us from doing business directly or indirectly in or with certain countries or parties, which could include affiliates
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Economic distress of suppliers that may require Ford to provide substantial financial support or take other measures to ensure supplies of components or materials and could increase costs, affect liquidity, or cause production constraints or disruptions
The automotive industry supply base experienced increased economic distress due to the sudden and substantial drop in industry sales volumes beginning in 2008
Dramatically lower industry sales volume made existing debt obligations and fixed cost levels difficult for many suppliers to manage, increasing pressure on the supply base
As a result, suppliers not only were less willing to reduce prices, but some requested direct or indirect price increases as well as new and shorter payment terms
At times, we have had to provide financial assistance to key suppliers to ensure an uninterrupted supply of materials and components
In addition, suppliers may continue to exit certain lines of business or close facilities due to economic concerns, management turnover, or other reasons
In such cases, we generally experience additional costs associated with transitioning to new suppliers
Each of these factors could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
Work stoppages at Ford or supplier facilities or other limitations on production whether as a result of labor disputes, natural or man made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, production constraints or difficulties, or other factors
A work stoppage or other limitation on production could occur at Ford or supplier facilities for any number of reasons, including as a result of disputes under existing collective bargaining agreements with labor unions or in connection with negotiation of new collective bargaining agreements, or as a result of supplier financial distress or other production constraints or difficulties, or for other reasons
As indicated, a work stoppage or other limitations on production at Ford or supplier facilities for any reason including but not limited to labor disputes, natural or man made disasters, tight credit markets or other financial distress, or production constraints or difficulties could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations
32 32 Many components used in our vehicles are available only from a single supplier and cannot be re sourced quickly or inexpensively to another supplier due to long lead times, new contractual commitments that may be required by another supplier before ramping up to provide the components or materials, etc
In addition to the general risks described above regarding interruption of supplies, which are exacerbated in the case of single source suppliers, the exclusive supplier of a key component potentially could exert significant bargaining power over price, quality, warranty claims, or other terms relating to a component
Labor or other constraints on Ford 8217 s ability to maintain competitive cost structure
Substantially all of the hourly employees in our Automotive operations in the United States and Canada are represented by unions and covered by collective bargaining agreements
We negotiated a four year agreement with the UAW in 2015 and will negotiate a new agreement with Unifor formerly the Canadian Auto Workers Union in 2016
Although we have negotiated transformational agreements in recent years, these agreements provide guaranteed wage and benefit levels throughout the contract term and some degree of income security, subject to certain conditions
As a practical matter, these agreements may restrict our ability to close plants and divest businesses
32 A substantial number of our employees in other regions are represented by unions or government councils, and legislation or custom promoting retention of manufacturing or other employment in the state, country, or region may constrain as a practical matter our ability to sell or close manufacturing or other facilities
Substantial pension and postretirement health care and life insurance liabilities impairing liquidity or financial condition
32 32 We have defined benefit retirement plans in the United States that cover many of our hourly and salaried employees
In addition, we and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor plans to provide other postretirement benefits 8220 OPEB 8221 for retired employees primarily health care and life insurance benefits
See Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information about these plans
These benefit plans impose significant liabilities on us that are not fully funded and will require additional cash contributions, which could impair our liquidity
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Our qualified U
defined benefit pension plans are subject to Title IV of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 8220 ERISA 8221
Under Title IV of ERISA, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation 8220 PBGC 8221 has the authority under certain circumstances or upon the occurrence of certain events to terminate a qualified underfunded pension plan
One such circumstance is the occurrence of an event that unreasonably increases the risk of unreasonably large losses to the PBGC
Although we believe it is unlikely that the PBGC would terminate any of our plans, in the event that our qualified U
pension plans were terminated at a time when the liabilities of the plans exceeded the assets of the plans, we would incur a liability to the PBGC that could be equal to the entire amount of the underfunding
If our cash flows and capital resources were insufficient to fund our pension or OPEB obligations, we could be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures, suspend dividend payments, seek additional capital, or restructure or refinance our indebtedness
Worse than assumed economic and demographic experience for postretirement benefit plans e
The measurement of our obligations, costs, and liabilities associated with benefits pursuant to our postretirement benefit plans requires that we estimate the present value of projected future payments to all participants
We use many assumptions in calculating these estimates, including assumptions related to discount rates, investment returns on designated plan assets, and demographic experience e
To the extent actual results are less favorable than our assumptions, there could be a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations
For discussion of our assumptions, see 8220 Critical Accounting Estimates 8221 in Item  7 and Note  12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
Restriction on use of tax attributes from tax law 8220 ownership change
Internal Revenue Code restricts the ability of a corporation that undergoes an ownership change to use its tax attributes, including net operating losses and tax credits 8220 Tax Attributes 8221
At December 31, 2015, we had Tax Attributes that would offset more than 15  billion of taxable income
For these purposes, an ownership change occurs if 5 percent shareholders of an issuer 8217 s outstanding common stock, collectively, increase their ownership percentage by more than 50 percentage points over a rolling three year period
In 2015, we renewed for an additional three year period our tax benefit preservation plan the 8220 Plan 8221 to reduce the risk of an ownership change under Section 382
Under the Plan, shares held by any person who acquires, without the approval of our Board of Directors, beneficial ownership of 4
99 or more of our outstanding Common Stock could be subject to significant dilution
The renewal is subject to shareholder approval at our annual meeting in May 2016
The discovery of defects in vehicles resulting in delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, or increased warranty costs
Meeting or exceeding many government mandated safety standards is costly and often technologically challenging, especially where standards may be in tension with the need to reduce vehicle weight in order to meet government mandated emissions and fuel economy standards
Government safety standards also require manufacturers to remedy defects related to vehicle safety through safety recall campaigns, and a manufacturer is obligated to recall vehicles if it determines that the vehicles do not comply with a safety standard
In addition, the introduction of new and innovative features and technology to our vehicles could increase the risk of defects or customer dissatisfaction
In 2014 and 2015, there was an unprecedented increase in the number of vehicles involved in safety recalls by manufacturers in the United States
The increase reflects NHTSA 8217 s continued expansion of its definition of safety defects under the Safety Act
In addition, NHTSA 8217 s enforcement strategy shifted to a significant increase in civil penalties levied and the use of consent orders requiring direct oversight by NHTSA of certain manufacturers 8217 safety processes, a trend that could continue
Should we or government safety regulators determine that a safety or other defect or a noncompliance exists with respect to certain of our vehicles prior to the start of production, the launch of such vehicle could be delayed until such defect is remedied
The costs associated with any protracted delay in new model launches necessary to remedy such defects, or the cost of recall campaigns or warranty costs to remedy such defects in vehicles that have been sold, could be substantial
These recall and warranty costs could be exacerbated to the extent they relate to global platforms
Furthermore, launch delays or recall actions also could adversely affect our reputation or market acceptance of our products as discussed above under 8220 Lower than anticipated market acceptance of Ford 8217 s new or existing products or services
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Increased safety, emissions, fuel economy, or other regulations resulting in higher costs, cash expenditures, and or sales restrictions
32 32 The worldwide automotive industry is governed by a substantial amount of government regulation, which often differs by state, region, and country
Government regulation has arisen, and proposals for additional regulation are advanced, primarily out of concern for the environment including concerns about the possibility of global climate change and its impact , vehicle safety, and energy independence
For example, as discussed above under 8220 Item 1
Business Governmental Standards, 8221 in the United States the CAFE standards for light duty vehicles are 35
5 mpg by the 2016 model year, 45 mpg by the 2021 model year, and 54
5 mpg by the 2025 model year EPA 8217 s parallel CO2 32 emission regulations impose similar standards
California 8217 s ZEV rules also mandate steep increases in the sale of electric vehicles and other advanced technology vehicles beginning in the 2018 model year
In addition, many governments regulate local product content and or impose import requirements as a means of creating jobs, protecting domestic producers, and influencing the balance of payments
32 In recent years, we have made significant changes to our product cycle plan to improve the overall fuel economy of vehicles we produce, thereby reducing their GHG emissions
The current fuel economy, CO2, and ZEV standards will be difficult to meet if fuel prices remain relatively low and market conditions do not drive consumers to purchase electric vehicles and other highly fuel efficient vehicles in large numbers
government has initiated an enforcement action against a major competitor in connection with its alleged use of 8220 defeat devices 8221 in hundreds of thousands of light duty diesel vehicles
The emergence of this issue has led to increased scrutiny of automaker emission testing by regulators around the world
This may lead to new regulations, more stringent enforcement programs, requests for field actions, and or delays in regulatory approvals
The cost to comply with existing government regulations is substantial and additional regulations or changes in consumer preferences that affect vehicle mix could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations
For more discussion of the impact of such standards on our global business, see the 8220 Governmental Standards 8221 discussion in 8220 Item  1
In addition, a number of governments, as well as non governmental organizations, publicly assess vehicles to their own protocols
The protocols could change aggressively, and any negative perception regarding the performance of our vehicles subjected to such tests could reduce future sales
Unusual or significant litigation, governmental investigations, or adverse publicity arising out of alleged defects in products, perceived environmental impacts, or otherwise
32 32 We spend substantial resources ensuring that we comply with governmental safety regulations, mobile and stationary source emissions regulations, and other standards
Compliance with governmental standards, however, does not necessarily prevent individual or class actions, which can entail significant cost and risk
In certain circumstances, courts may permit tort claims even where our vehicles comply with federal and or other applicable law
Furthermore, simply responding to actual or threatened litigation or government investigations of our compliance with regulatory standards, whether related to our products or business or commercial relationships, may require significant expenditures of time and other resources
Litigation also is inherently uncertain, and we could experience significant adverse results
In addition, adverse publicity surrounding an allegation may cause significant reputational harm that could have a significant adverse effect on our sales
A change in requirements under long term supply arrangements committing Ford to purchase minimum or fixed quantities of certain parts, or to pay a minimum amount to the seller 8220 take or pay 8221 contracts
We have entered into a number of long term supply contracts that require us to purchase a fixed quantity of parts to be used in the production of our vehicles
If our need for any of these parts were to lessen, we could still be required to purchase a specified quantity of the part or pay a minimum amount to the seller pursuant to the take or pay contract, which could have a substantial adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Adverse effects on results from a decrease in or cessation or clawback of government incentives related to investments
We receive economic benefits from national, state, and local governments in various regions of the world in the form of incentives designed to encourage manufacturers to establish, maintain, or increase investment, workforce, or production
These incentives may take various forms, including grants, loan subsidies, and tax abatements or credits
The impact of these incentives can be significant in a particular market during a reporting period
For example, most of our manufacturing facilities in South America are located in Brazil, where the state or federal governments have historically offered, and continue to offer, significant incentives to manufacturers to encourage capital investment, increase manufacturing production, and create jobs
As a result, the performance of our South American operations has been impacted favorably by government incentives to a substantial extent
In Brazil, however, the federal government has levied assessments against us concerning our calculation of federal incentives we received, and certain states have challenged the grant to us of tax incentives by the state of Bahia, including a constitutional challenge of state incentives that is pending in Brazil 8217 s Supreme Court
A decrease in, expiration without renewal of, or other cessation or clawback of government incentives for any of our business units, as a result of administrative decision or otherwise, could have a substantial adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations
See Note  2 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of our accounting for government incentives, and 8220 Item  3
Legal Proceedings 8221 for a discussion of tax proceedings in Brazil and the potential requirement for us to post collateral
Inherent limitations of internal controls impacting financial statements and safeguarding of assets
Our internal control over financial reporting and our operating internal controls may not prevent or detect misstatements or loss of assets because of inherent limitations, including the possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud
Effective internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement accuracy and safeguarding of assets
Cybersecurity risks to operational systems, security systems, or infrastructure owned by Ford, Ford Credit, or a third party vendor or supplier
32 32 We are at risk for interruptions, outages, and breaches of i operational systems including business, financial, accounting, product development, consumer receivables, data processing, or manufacturing processes ii facility security systems and or iii in vehicle systems or mobile devices
Such cyber incidents could materially disrupt operational systems result in loss of trade secrets or other proprietary or competitively sensitive information compromise personally identifiable information of customers, employees, or others jeopardize the security of our facilities and or affect the performance of in vehicle systems
A cyber incident could be caused by malicious third parties using sophisticated, targeted methods to circumvent firewalls, encryption, and other security defenses, including hacking, fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception
The techniques used by third parties change frequently and may be difficult to detect for long periods of time
A significant cyber incident could impact production capability, harm our reputation and or subject us to regulatory actions or litigation
32 Failure of financial institutions to fulfill commitments under committed credit and liquidity facilities
32 32 Under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015 and as further amended the 8220 revolving credit facility 8221 , we are able to borrow, repay, and then re borrow up to 13
Certain of our subsidiaries have standby or revolving credit facilities on which they depend for liquidity
If the financial institutions that provide commitments under the revolving credit facility, our subsidiaries 8217 standby or revolving credit facilities, or other committed credit facilities were to default on their obligation to fund the commitments, these facilities would not be available to us, which could substantially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition
For discussion of our Credit Agreement, see 8220 Liquidity and Capital Resources 8221 in Item  7 and Note  13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Inability of Ford Credit to access debt, securitization, or derivative markets around the world at competitive rates or in sufficient amounts, due to credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, regulatory requirements, or other factors
32 32 32 Ford Credit 8217 s ability to obtain unsecured funding at a reasonable cost is dependent on its credit ratings or its perceived creditworthiness
Ford Credit 8217 s ability to obtain securitized funding under its committed asset backed liquidity programs and certain other asset backed securitization transactions is subject to having a sufficient amount of assets eligible for these programs, as well as Ford Credit 8217 s ability to obtain appropriate credit ratings and, for certain committed programs, derivatives to manage the interest rate risk
Over time, and particularly in the event of any credit rating downgrades, market volatility, market disruption, or other factors, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates because of funding constraints
In addition, Ford Credit may be limited in the amount of receivables it purchases or originates in certain countries or regions if the local capital markets, particularly in developing countries, do not exist or are not adequately developed
Similarly, Ford Credit may reduce the amount of receivables it purchases or originates if there is a significant decline in the demand for the types of securities it offers or Ford Credit is unable to obtain derivatives to manage the interest rate risk associated with its securitization transactions
A significant reduction in the amount of receivables Ford Credit purchases or originates would significantly reduce its ongoing profits and could adversely affect its ability to support the sale of Ford vehicles
Higher than expected credit losses, lower than anticipated residual values, or higher than expected return volumes for leased vehicles
32 32 Credit risk is the possibility of loss from a customer 8217 s or dealer 8217 s failure to make payments according to contract terms
Credit risk which is heavily dependent upon economic factors including unemployment, consumer debt service burden, personal income growth, dealer profitability, and used car prices has a significant impact on Ford Credit 8217 s business
The level of credit losses Ford Credit may experience could exceed its expectations and adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations
In addition, Ford Credit projects expected residual values including residual value support payments from Ford and return volumes for the vehicles it leases
Actual proceeds realized by Ford Credit upon the sale of returned leased vehicles at lease termination may be lower than the amount projected, which would reduce the profitability of the lease transaction
Among the factors that can affect the value of returned lease vehicles are the volume of vehicles returned, economic conditions, and quality or perceived quality, safety, fuel efficiency, or reliability of the vehicles
Actual return volumes may be higher than expected and can be influenced by contractual lease end values relative to auction values, marketing programs for new vehicles, and general economic conditions
Each of these factors, alone or in combination, has the potential to adversely affect Ford Credit 8217 s profitability if actual results were to differ significantly from Ford Credit 8217 s projections
See 8220 Critical Accounting Estimates 8221 in Item  7 for additional discussion
Increased competition from banks, financial institutions, or other third parties seeking to increase their share of financing Ford vehicles
32 32 No single company is a dominant force in the automotive finance industry
Most of Ford Credit 8217 s bank competitors in the United States use credit aggregation systems that permit dealers to send, through standardized systems, retail credit applications to multiple finance sources to evaluate financing options offered by these sources
Also, direct on line or large dealer group financing options provide consumers with alternative finance sources and or increased pricing transparency
All of these financing alternatives drive greater competition based on financing rates and terms
Competition from such institutions and alternative finance sources could adversely affect Ford Credit 8217 s profitability and the volume of its retail business
In addition, Ford Credit may face increased competition on wholesale financing for Ford dealers
New or increased credit regulations, consumer or data protection regulations, or other regulations resulting in higher costs and or additional financing restrictions
32 32 As a finance company, Ford Credit is highly regulated by governmental authorities in the locations in which it operates, which can impose significant additional costs and or restrictions on its business
In the United States, for example, Ford Credit 8217 s operations are subject to regulation, supervision, and licensing under various federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including the federal Truth in Lending Act, Consumer Leasing Act, Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and Fair Credit Reporting Act
Risk Factors Continued                                                                                                         Congress also passed the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 8220 Dodd Frank Act 8221 in 2010 to reform practices in the financial services industries, including automotive financing and securitizations
The Dodd Frank Act directs federal agencies to adopt rules to regulate the consumer finance industry and the capital markets and, among other things, gives the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 8220 CFPB 8221 broad rule making and enforcement authority for a wide range of consumer financial protection laws that regulate consumer finance businesses, such as Ford Credit 8217 s retail automotive financing business
Exercise of these powers by the CFPB may increase the costs of, impose additional restrictions on, or otherwise adversely affect companies in the automotive finance business
For example, in March 2013, the CFPB issued a bulletin recommending that indirect vehicle lenders, a class that includes Ford Credit, take steps to monitor and or impose controls over dealer discretionary pricing
Effective August 31, 2015, the CFPB has authority to supervise and examine the largest nonbank automotive finance companies, such as Ford Credit, for compliance with consumer financial protection laws
In addition, the Dodd Frank Act provides that a nonbank financial company could be designated a 8220 systemically important financial institution 8221 by the Financial Stability Oversight Council and thus be subject to supervision by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Such a designation would mean that a nonbank finance company such as Ford Credit, in effect, could be regulated like a bank with respect to capital and other requirements, but without the benefits of being a bank 8212 such as  the ability to offer Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 8220 FDIC 8221 insured deposits
The Dodd Frank Act also creates an alternative liquidation framework under which the FDIC may be appointed as receiver of a nonbank financial company if the U
Treasury Secretary in consultation with the President of the United States determines that the company is in default or danger of default and the resolution of the company under other applicable law e
bankruptcy law would have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United States
The FDIC 8217 s powers under this framework may vary from those of a bankruptcy court under U
bankruptcy law, which could adversely impact securitization markets, including Ford Credit 8217 s funding activities, regardless of whether Ford Credit ever is determined to be subject to the Dodd Frank Act 8217 s alternative liquidation framework
In some countries outside the United States, some of Ford Credit 8217 s subsidiaries are regulated banking institutions and are required, among other things, to maintain minimum capital and liquidity
In many other locations, governmental authorities require companies to have licenses in order to conduct financing businesses
Compliance with these laws and regulations imposes additional costs on Ford Credit and affects the conduct of its business
Additional regulation could add significant cost or operational constraints that might impair Ford Credit 8217 s profitability
Our principal properties include manufacturing and assembly facilities, distribution centers, warehouses, sales or administrative offices, and engineering centers
Our facilities are situated in various sections of the country and include assembly plants, engine plants, casting plants, metal stamping plants, transmission plants, and other component plants
About half of our distribution centers are leased we own approximately 50 of the total square footage, and lease the balance
A substantial amount of our warehousing is provided by third party providers under service contracts
Because the facilities provided pursuant to third party service contracts need not be dedicated exclusively or even primarily to our use, these spaces are not included in the number of distribution centers warehouses listed in the table below
The majority of the warehouses that we operate are leased, although many of our manufacturing and assembly facilities contain some warehousing space
Substantially all of our sales offices are leased space
Approximately 98 of the total square footage of our engineering centers and our supplementary research and development space is owned by us
In addition, we maintain and operate manufacturing plants, assembly facilities, parts distribution centers, and engineering centers outside of the United States
manufacturing plants, assembly facilities, and engineering centers
The majority of our parts distribution centers outside of the United States are either leased or provided by vendors under service contracts
We and the entities that we consolidated as of December 31, 2015 use eight regional engineering, research, and development centers, and 67 manufacturing plants as shown in the table below  Segment  PlantsNorth America  29South America  8Europe  16Middle East amp Africa  2Asia Pacific  12Total  67  Included in the number of plants shown above are plants that are operated by us or our consolidated joint ventures that support our Automotive sector
The significant consolidated joint ventures and the number of plants each owns are as follows 8226 Ford Lio Ho Motor Company Ltd
8220 FLH 8221 32 8212 a joint venture in Taiwan among Ford 70 partner , the Lio Ho Group 25 partner , and individual shareholders 5 ownership in aggregate that assembles a variety of Ford and Mazda vehicles sourced from Ford as well as Mazda
In addition to domestic assembly, FLH imports Ford brand built up vehicles from the Asia Pacific region, Europe, and the United States
8220 Ford Sollers 8221 8212 a 50 50 joint venture between Ford and Sollers OJSC 8220 Sollers 8221 , in which Ford has control
32 The joint venture primarily is engaged in manufacturing a range of Ford passenger cars and light commercial vehicles for sale in Russia, and has an exclusive right to manufacture, assemble, and distribute certain Ford vehicles in Russia through the licensing of certain trademarks and intellectual property rights
The joint venture has been approved to participate in Russia 8217 s industrial assembly regime, which qualifies it for reduced import duties for parts imported into Russia
In addition to its three existing manufacturing facilities in Russia, Ford Sollers launched an engine plant in Russia in 2015
8226 Ford Vietnam Limited 32 8212 a joint venture between Ford 75 partner and Diesel Song Cong One Member Limited Liability Company a subsidiary of the Vietnam Engine and Agricultural Machinery Corporation, which in turn is owned by the State of Vietnam represented by the Ministry of Industry and Trade 25  partner
Ford Vietnam Limited assembles and distributes a variety of Ford passenger and commercial vehicle models
The joint venture operates one plant in Vietnam
Properties Continued                                                                                                     In addition to the plants that we operate directly or that are operated by our consolidated joint ventures, additional plants that support our Automotive sector are operated by unconsolidated joint ventures of which we are a partner
These plants are not included in the number of plants shown in the table above
The most significant of the automotive unconsolidated joint ventures are as follows 8226 AutoAlliance Thailand Co
8220 AAT 8221 32 8212 a 50 50 joint venture between Ford and Mazda that owns and operates a manufacturing plant in Rayong, Thailand
AAT produces Ford and Mazda products for domestic and export sales
8220 CAF 8221 32 8212 a 50 50 joint venture between Ford and Chongqing Changan Automobile Co
CAF currently operates five assembly plants, an engine plant, and a transmission plant in China where it produces and distributes an expanding variety of Ford passenger vehicle models
8220 CFME 8221 32 8212 a joint venture among Ford 25 partner , Mazda 25  partner , and Changan 50 partner
CFME is located in Nanjing, and produces engines for Ford and Mazda vehicles manufactured in China
8226 Ford Otomotiv Sanayi Anonim Sirketi 8220 Ford Otosan 8221 32 8212 a joint venture in Turkey among Ford 41 partner , the Koc Group of Turkey 41 partner , and public investors 18 that is a major supplier to us of the Transit, Transit Custom, and Transit Courier commercial vehicles and is our sole distributor of Ford vehicles in Turkey
Ford Otosan also makes the Cargo truck for the Turkish and export markets, and certain engines and transmissions, most of which are under license from us
The joint venture owns two plants, a parts distribution depot, a product development center, and a new research and development center in Turkey
8226 Getrag Ford Transmissions GmbH 8220 GFT 8221 32 8212 a 50 50 joint venture with Getrag International GmbH, a German company
GFT operates plants in Halewood, England Cologne, Germany Bordeaux, France and Kechnex, Slovakia to produce, among other things, manual transmissions for our Europe business unit
8226 JMC 32 8212 a publicly traded company in China with Ford 32 shareholder and Jiangling Holdings, Ltd
is a 50 50 joint venture between Changan and Jiangling Motors Company Group
The public investors in JMC own 27 of its total outstanding shares
JMC assembles Ford Transit, Ford Everest, Ford engines, and non Ford vehicles and engines for distribution in China and in other export markets
JMC operates two assembly plants and one engine plant in Nanchang
In 2015, JMC opened a new plant in Taiyuan to assemble heavy duty trucks and engines
The facilities described above are, in the opinion of management, suitable and adequate for the manufacture and assembly of our and our joint ventures 8217 products
The furniture, equipment, and other physical property owned by our Financial Services operations are not material in relation to the operations 8217 total assets
The litigation process is subject to many uncertainties, and the outcome of individual matters is not predictable with assurance
See Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for discussion of loss contingencies
Following is a discussion of our significant pending legal proceedings PRODUCT LIABILITY MATTERSWe are a defendant in numerous actions in state and federal courts within and outside of the United States alleging damages from injuries resulting from or aggravated by alleged defects in our vehicles
In many, no monetary amount of damages is specified, or the specific amount alleged is the jurisdictional minimum
Our experience with litigation alleging a specific amount of damages suggests that such amounts, on average, bear little relation to the actual amount of damages, if any, that we will pay in resolving such matters
In addition to pending actions, we assess the likelihood of incidents that likely have occurred but not yet been reported to us we also take into consideration specific matters that have been raised as claims but have not yet proceeded to litigation
Individual product liability matters which, if resolved unfavorably to the Company, likely would involve a significant cost would be described herein
ASBESTOS MATTERS Asbestos was used in some brakes, clutches, and other automotive components from the early 1900s
Along with other vehicle manufacturers, we have been the target of asbestos litigation and, as a result, are a defendant in various actions for injuries claimed to have resulted from alleged exposure to Ford parts and other products containing asbestos
Plaintiffs in these personal injury cases allege various health problems as a result of asbestos exposure, either from component parts found in older vehicles, insulation or other asbestos products in our facilities, or asbestos aboard our former maritime fleet
We believe that we are being targeted more aggressively in asbestos suits because many previously targeted companies have filed for bankruptcy, or emerged from bankruptcy relieved of liability for such claims
Most of the asbestos litigation we face involves individuals who claim to have worked on the brakes of our vehicles
We are prepared to defend these cases, and believe that the scientific evidence confirms our long standing position that there is no increased risk of asbestos related disease as a result of exposure to the type of asbestos formerly used in the brakes on our vehicles
The extent of our financial exposure to asbestos litigation remains very difficult to estimate and could include both compensatory and punitive damage awards
The majority of our asbestos cases do not specify a dollar amount for damages in many of the other cases the dollar amount specified is the jurisdictional minimum, and the vast majority of these cases involve multiple defendants, sometimes more than one hundred
Many of these cases also involve multiple plaintiffs, and often we are unable to tell from the pleadings which plaintiffs are making claims against us as opposed to other defendants
Annual payout and defense costs may become significant in the future
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS We have received notices under various federal and state environmental laws that we along with others are or may be a potentially responsible party for the costs associated with remediating numerous hazardous substance storage, recycling, or disposal sites in many states and, in some instances, for natural resource damages
We also may have been a generator of hazardous substances at a number of other sites
The amount of any such costs or damages for which we may be held responsible could be significant
32 We have two environmental legal proceedings to which a governmental authority is a party and in which we believe there is the possibility of monetary sanctions in excess of 100,000 Notices of Violation to Ford Chicago Assembly Plant and Dearborn Truck Plant
Environmental Protection Agency the 8220 EPA 8221 issued a notice of violation to our Chicago Assembly Plant and on December 26, 2015 the EPA issued a notice of violation to our Dearborn Truck Plant
The EPA alleges that the plants violated several requirements related to their air permits
Monetary sanctions, if any, have not yet been determined
At this time, we have no such purported class actions filed against us
Two Brazilian states and the Brazilian federal tax authority currently have outstanding substantial tax assessments against Ford Brazil related to state and federal tax incentives Ford Brazil receives for its operations in the Brazilian state of Bahia
All assessments have been appealed to the relevant administrative court of each jurisdiction
For each assessment, if we do not prevail at the administrative level, we plan to appeal to the relevant state or federal judicial court, which would likely require us to post significant collateral in order to proceed
Our appeals with one state and the federal tax authority remain at the administrative level
In the other state, where two cases are pending, we have appealed to the judicial court and to date we have not been required to post collateral
Customs and Border Protection 8220 CBP 8221 ruled that Transit Connects imported as passenger wagons and later converted into cargo vans are subject to the 25 duty applicable to cargo vehicles, rather than the 2
As a result of the ruling, CBP is requiring Ford to pay the 25 duty upon importation of Transit Connects that will be converted to cargo vehicles, and is seeking the difference in duty rates for prior imports
Our protest of the ruling within CBP was denied and we filed a challenge in the U
If we prevail, we will receive a refund of the contested amounts paid, plus interest
If we do not prevail, CBP would recover the increased duties for prior imports, plus interest, and might assert a claim for penalties
Our executive officers are as follows, along with each executive officer 8217 s position and age at February 1, 2016 Name   Position  PositionHeld Since  AgeWilliam Clay Ford, Jr
a  Executive Chairman and Chairman of the Board  Sept
2006  58Mark Fields b  President and Chief Executive Officer  Jul
Executive Vice President 8211 President, Europe, Middle East amp Africa  Jan
Hinrichs  Executive Vice President 8211 President, The Americas  Dec
Odell  Executive Vice President 8211 Global Marketing, Sales and Service  Jan
2015  60Raj Nair  Executive Vice President 8211 Product Development and Chief Technical Officer  Dec
2015  51Bob Shanks  Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer  Apr
2012  63John Casesa  Group Vice President 8211 Global Strategy  Mar
2015  53Ray Day  Group Vice President 8211 Communications  Mar
2013  49Felicia Fields  Group Vice President 8211 Human Resources and Corporate Services  Apr
2008  50Bennie Fowler  Group Vice President 8211 Quality and New Model Launch  Apr
2008  59Bruce Hettle  Group Vice President 8211 Manufacturing and Labor Affairs  Jan
Ojakli  Group Vice President 8211 Government and Community Relations  Jan
2004  48Dave Schoch  Group Vice President 8211 President, Asia Pacific  Dec
2012  64Bernard Silverstone  Group Vice President 8211 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ford Motor Credit Co
2013  60Hau Thai Tang  Group Vice President 8211 Global Purchasing  Aug
2016  52Stuart Rowley  Vice President and Controller  Apr
2012  48 a Also a Director, Chair of the Office of the Chairman and Chief Executive, Chair of the Finance Committee, and a member of the Sustainability Committee of the Board of Directors
b Also a Director and member of the Office of the Chairman and Chief Executive and the Finance Committee of the Board of Directors
Each of the officers listed above, except for John Casesa, has been employed by Ford or its subsidiaries in one or more capacities during the past five years
Prior to joining Ford in March 2015, John Casesa was Senior Managing Director of Guggenheim Partners, where he led the firm 8217 s automotive investment banking activities since 2010
Under our by laws, executive officers are elected by the Board of Directors at an annual meeting of the Board held for this purpose or by a resolution to fill a vacancy
Each officer is elected to hold office until a successor is chosen or as otherwise provided in the by laws
Market for Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Our Common Stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange in the United States, and on certain stock exchanges in Belgium and France
The table below shows the high and low sales prices for our Common Stock, and the dividends we paid per share of Common and Class B Stock, for each quarterly period in 2015 and 2014  2015  2014  Ford Common Stock price per share a FirstQuarter  SecondQuarter  ThirdQuarter  FourthQuarter  FirstQuarter  SecondQuarter  ThirdQuarter  FourthQuarterHigh 16
26Dividends per share of Ford Common and Class B Stock0
125 a New York Stock Exchange composite intraday prices as listed in the price history database available at www
As of February 4, 2016, stockholders of record of Ford included approximately 137,858 holders of Common Stock and 34 holders of Class B Stock
In March 2015, we announced a modest anti dilutive share repurchase program to offset the dilutive effect of share based compensation granted in 2015
On December 31, 2015, we adopted a change in accounting method for certain components of expense related to our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans see Note 1 32 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
We have applied the change in accounting method retrospectively to periods covered in this Report, and the amounts below reflect this change
05           Common Stock price range NYSE Composite Intraday          High16
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW 32 RevenueOur Automotive sector 8217 s revenue is generated primarily by sales of vehicles, parts, and accessories we generally treat sales and marketing incentives as a reduction to revenue
Revenue is recorded when all risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to our customers generally, our dealers and distributors
For the majority of sales, this occurs when products are shipped from our manufacturing facilities
This is not the case, however, with respect to vehicles produced for sale to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option
These vehicles are accounted for as operating leases, with lease revenue and profits recognized over the term of the lease
Proceeds from the sale of vehicles at auction are recognized in revenue at the time of sale
Most of the vehicles sold by us to our dealers and distributors are financed at wholesale by Ford Credit
Upon Ford Credit originating the wholesale receivable related to a dealer 8217 s purchase of a vehicle, Ford Credit pays cash to the relevant legal entity in our Automotive sector in payment of the dealer 8217 s obligation for the purchase price of the vehicle
The dealer then pays the wholesale finance receivable to Ford Credit when it sells the vehicle to a retail customer
Our Financial Services sector 8217 s revenue is generated primarily from interest on finance receivables, net of certain deferred origination costs that are included as a reduction of financing revenue, and such revenue is recognized over the term of the receivable using the interest method
Also, revenue from operating leases is recognized on a straight line basis over the term of the lease
Income is generated to the extent revenues exceed expenses, most of which are interest, depreciation, and operating expenses
Transactions between our Automotive and Financial Services sectors occur in the ordinary course of business
For example, we offer special retail financing and lease incentives to dealers 8217 customers who choose to finance or lease our vehicles from Ford Credit
The estimated cost for these incentives is recorded as revenue reduction to Automotive sales at the later of the date the related vehicle sales to our dealers are recorded or the date the incentive program is both approved and communicated
In order to compensate Ford Credit for the lower interest or lease rates offered to the retail customer, we pay the discounted value of the incentive directly to Ford Credit when it originates the retail finance or lease contract with the dealer 8217 s customer
Ford Credit recognizes the amount over the life of retail finance contracts as an element of financing revenue and over the life of lease contracts as a reduction to depreciation
See Note  1 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for a more detailed discussion of transactions and payments between our Automotive and Financial Services sectors
Costs and ExpensesOur income statement classifies our Automotive total costs and expenses into two categories i cost of sales, and ii  selling, administrative, and other expenses
We include within cost of sales those costs related to the development, manufacture, and distribution of our vehicles, parts, and accessories
Specifically, we include in cost of sales each of the following material costs including commodity costs freight costs warranty, including product recall and customer satisfaction program costs labor and other costs related to the development and manufacture of our products depreciation and amortization and other associated costs
We include within selling, administrative, and other expenses labor and other costs not directly related to the development and manufacture of our products, including such expenses as advertising and sales promotion costs
Certain of our costs, such as material costs, generally vary directly with changes in volume and mix of production
In our industry, production volume often varies significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year
Quarterly production volumes experience seasonal shifts throughout the year including peak retail sales seasons, and the impact on production of model changeover and new product launches
As we have seen in recent years, annual production volumes are heavily impacted by external economic factors, including the pace of economic growth and factors such as the availability of consumer credit and cost of fuel
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued As a result, we analyze the profit impact of certain cost changes holding constant present year volume and mix and currency exchange, in order to evaluate our cost trends absent the impact of varying production and currency exchange levels
We analyze these cost changes in the following categories 8226 Contribution Costs 32 8211 these costs typically vary with production volume
These costs include material, commodity, warranty, and freight and duty costs
8226 Structural Costs 32 8211 these costs typically do not have a directly proportionate relationship to production volume
These costs include manufacturing, engineering, spending related, advertising and sales promotion, administrative and selling, and pension and OPEB costs
While contribution costs generally vary directly in proportion to production volume, elements within our structural costs category are impacted to differing degrees by changes in production volume
We also have varying degrees of discretion when it comes to controlling the different elements within our structural costs
For example, depreciation and amortization expense largely is associated with prior capital spending decisions
On the other hand, while labor costs do not vary directly with production volume, manufacturing labor costs may be impacted by changes in volume, for example when we increase overtime, add a production shift or add personnel to support volume increases
Other structural costs, such as advertising or engineering costs, do not necessarily have a directly proportionate relationship to production volume
Our structural costs generally are within our discretion, although to varying degrees, and can be adjusted over time in response to external factors
We consider certain structural costs to be a direct investment in future growth and revenue
For example, increases in structural costs are necessary to grow our business and improve profitability as we expand around the world, invest in new products and technologies, respond to increasing industry sales volume, and grow our market share
Automotive total costs and expenses for full year 2015 was 134
Material and commodity costs make up the largest portion of our Automotive total costs and expenses, representing in 2015 about two thirds of the total amount
Of the remaining balance of our Automotive costs and expenses, the largest piece is structural costs
Although material costs are our largest absolute cost, our margins can be affected significantly by changes in any category of costs
Key Economic Factors and Trends Affecting the Automotive IndustryCurrency Exchange Rate Volatility
Federal Reserve raised its policy interest rate in December 2015, for the first time since 2006, and the resulting shifts in capital flows have contributed to downward pressure on several emerging market currencies
In some cases that pressure is aggravated by low commodity prices, high inflation, or unstable policy environments
Additionally, the yen and euro have depreciated as a result of monetary policy easing by the Bank of Japan and European Central Bank
The weak yen, in particular, adds significant potential downward pressure on vehicle pricing across many markets globally
In most markets, exchange rates are market determined, and all are impacted by many different macroeconomic and policy factors, and thus likely to remain volatile
However, in some markets, exchange rates are heavily influenced or controlled by governments
According to IHS Automotive, an automotive research firm, the estimated automotive industry global production capacity for light vehicles of about 119 million units exceeded global production by about 31  million units in 2015
In North America and Europe, two regions where a significant share of industry revenue is earned, excess capacity as a percent of production was an estimated 7 and 22 , respectively, in 2015
In China, the auto industry also witnessed excess capacity at 54 of production in 2015, as manufacturers competed to capitalize on China 8217 s future market potential
According to production capacity data projected by IHS Automotive, global excess capacity conditions could continue for several years at an average of about 33  million units per year during the period from 2016 to 2020
Excess capacity, coupled with a proliferation of new products being introduced in key segments, will keep pressure on manufacturers 8217 ability to increase prices
In North America, the industry restructuring of the past few years has allowed manufacturers to better match production with demand, although Japanese and Korean manufacturers also have capacity located outside of the region directed to North America
In the future, Chinese and Indian manufacturers are expected to enter U
and European markets, further intensifying competition
Over the long term, intense competition and excess capacity will continue to put downward pressure on inflation adjusted prices for similarly contented vehicles in the United States and contribute to a challenging pricing environment for the automotive industry
In Europe, the excess capacity situation was exacerbated by weakening demand and the lack of reductions in existing capacity, such that negative pricing pressure is expected to continue for the foreseeable future
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Commodity and Energy Price Changes
The price of oil has continued to decline in early 2016, after averaging under 50 per barrel in 2015, as global supply remains strong despite the ongoing price pressures
Other commodity prices also have declined recently, but over the longer term prices are likely to trend higher given expectations for global demand growth
Our financial results depend on the profitability of the vehicles we sell, which may vary significantly by vehicle line
In general, larger vehicles tend to command higher prices and be more profitable than smaller vehicles, both across and within vehicle segments
For example, in North America, our larger, more profitable vehicles had an average contribution margin that was about 135 of our total average contribution margin across all vehicles, whereas our smaller vehicles had significantly lower contribution margins
Government regulations aimed at reducing emissions and increasing fuel efficiency may increase the cost of vehicles by more than the perceived benefit to the consumer
Given the backdrop of excess capacity, these regulations could dampen contribution margins
As we execute our One Ford plan, we are working to create best in class vehicles on global platforms that contribute higher margins, and offering a more balanced portfolio of vehicles with which we aim to be among the leaders in fuel efficiency in every segment in which we compete
Like other manufacturers, we are increasing our participation in newly developed and emerging markets, such as Brazil, Russia, India, and China, in which vehicle sales are expected to increase at a faster rate than in most mature markets
The largest segments in these markets are small vehicles i
To increase our participation in these fast growing markets, we are significantly increasing our production capacity, directly or through joint ventures
Although we expect positive contribution margins from higher small vehicle sales, one result of increased production of small vehicles may be that, over time, our average per unit margin decreases because small vehicles tend to have lower margins than medium and large vehicles
To the extent governments in various regions erect or intensify barriers to imports, or implement currency policy that advantages local exporters selling into the global marketplace, there can be a significant negative impact on manufacturers based in markets that promote free trade
While we believe the long term trend is toward the growth of free trade, we have noted with concern recent developments in a number of regions
In Asia Pacific, for example, the recent dramatic depreciation of the yen significantly reduces the cost of exports into the United States, Europe, and other global markets by Japanese manufacturers
Over a period of time, the emerging weakness of the yen can contribute to other countries pursuing weak currency policies by intervening in the exchange rate markets
This is particularly likely in other Asian countries, such as South Korea
As another example, government actions in South America to incentivize local production and balance trade are driving trade frictions between South American countries and also with Mexico, resulting in business environment instability and new trade barriers
We will continue to monitor and address developing issues around trade policy
During 2015, mature market government bond yields and inflation were lower than expected, and there is a rising risk of persistent disinflation and, in some markets, even outright deflation
The lower levels of inflation and interest rates were unexpected partially because they have occurred against a backdrop of loose monetary policy and high levels of mature market deficits and debt
The eventual implications of higher government deficits and debt, with potentially higher long term interest rates, may still drive a higher cost of capital over our planning period
Higher interest rates and or taxes to address the higher deficits also may impede real growth in gross domestic product and, therefore, vehicle sales over our planning period
For additional information on our assessment of the business environment, refer to the 8220 Outlook 8221 section below
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Trends and Strategies The traditional global automotive industry achieves around 2
At the same time, transportation services, which includes services such as mass transit, taxis, and ride sharing, totals about 5
4 trillion in revenue annually, and is expected to grow in the next 15 years
Yet, we and our auto industry competitors receive virtually none of the revenue from those transportation services
We see being an auto company and 32 a mobility company as a significant opportunity, and we are very serious about investing in, innovating in, and leading in both
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Strengthening Today 8217 s Business
We are strengthening and investing in our core business of designing, developing, manufacturing, marketing, financing, and servicing cars, trucks, SUVs, and electrified vehicles
Having completed the launch of 16 new vehicles globally in 2015, we are planning another active product year in 2016 with 12 global product launches, including the new F Series Super Duty, Ford GT, and Lincoln Continental
We will add more electrified products for Ford and Lincoln, including the new Focus Electric, which features all new DC fast charge capability delivering an 80 charge in an estimated 30 minutes and a projected 100 mile range
Strengthening our business includes restructuring the parts that have no reasonable prospect for profitability or are no longer relevant for the future we see for ourselves
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Pursuing Emerging Opportunities
At the same time that we are strengthening our core business, we are pursuing emerging opportunities through Ford Smart Mobility, our plan to be a leader in connectivity, mobility, autonomous vehicles, the customer experience, and data and analytics
We will have more to say concerning Ford Smart Mobility throughout the year, but a few of the highlights so far include 8226 SYNC Connect by 2020, more than 10 million vehicles in North America will be equipped with SYNC Connect built in modems
SYNC Connect will enhance our connected car capabilities by enabling our customers to lock, unlock, start, and locate vehicles using their smart phones
8226 Autonomous Vehicles we are tripling our fleet of Fusion Hybrid autonomous research vehicles this year, making our fully autonomous vehicle fleet the largest of all automakers
We are increasing autonomous testing at M City and in California, and we are the first automaker to have tested autonomous vehicles in the snow
8226 FordPass we are working to transform the automotive customer experience to be more enjoyable, starting with the introduction of FordPass
Through FordPass, customers will be able to connect with marketplace services including parking solutions, ride sharing, car sharing, and multimodal transportation , solve mobility challenges with live 8220 guides 8221 who will help with their mobility challenges all at the touch of a button , and access merchandise and unique experiences in collaboration with affinity partners including McDonald 8217 s, 7 Eleven, and others
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Our Three Priorities
As we strengthen our core business and prepare for emerging opportunities, we are staying focused on three priorities 8226 accelerating the pace of progress on our One Ford plan, 8226 delivering product excellence with passion, and 8226 driving innovation in every part of our business
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued RESULTS OF OPERATIONSOn December 31, 2015, we adopted a change in accounting method for certain components of expense related to our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans see Note  1 32 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
We have applied the change in accounting method retrospectively to periods covered in this Report, and the amounts below reflect this change
TOTAL COMPANYOur net income attributable to Ford Motor Company was 7
84  per share of Common and Class  B Stock in 2015, an increase of 6
Our pre tax results and net income were as follows  2015  2014  2013  Mils
Pre tax results      Automotive sector pre tax results excl
special items 8,772  5,499  8,423Financial Services sector pre tax results2,028  1,794  1,672Total Company pre tax results excl
special items 10,800  7,293  10,095Special items Automotive sector 548  6,059  4,276Total Company pre tax results incl
The first category includes pension and OPEB remeasurement gains and losses
These gains and losses, generally recognized in the fourth quarter, are not reflective of our underlying Automotive business results
The second category includes items related to our efforts to match production capacity and cost structure to market demand and changing model mix and therefore helps investors track amounts related to those activities
The third category includes items that we do not generally consider to be indicative of our ongoing operating activities, and therefore allows investors analyzing our pre tax results to identify certain infrequent significant items that they may wish to exclude when considering the trend of ongoing operating results
As detailed in Note 24 of the Notes to the Financial Statements, we allocate special items to a separate reconciling item, as opposed to allocating them among the operating segments and Other Automotive, reflecting the fact that management excludes these items from its review of operating segment results for purposes of measuring segment profitability and allocating resources among the segments
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The following table details Automotive sector special items in each category  2015  2014  2013  Mils
9 billion in 2015 and 2014, respectively, primarily reflect the tax associated with our pre tax special items
Our tax special item of 116 million in 2013 reflects the tax associated with our pre tax special items, offset by a favorable increase in deferred tax assets related to investments in our European operations and the release of valuation allowances held against U
The following table shows our earnings per share on a diluted basis for full year 2015  Net Income Attributable to Ford  Operating Results Excluding Special ItemsAfter Tax Results Mils
Diluted after tax results 7,373  7,716Basic and Diluted Shares Mils
Basic shares average shares outstanding 3,969  3,969Net dilutive options33  33Diluted shares 4,002  4,002     Diluted Earnings Per Share 1
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Discussion of Automotive sector, Financial Services sector, and total Company results of operations below is on a pre tax basis and excludes special items unless otherwise specifically noted
References to records by Automotive segments 8212 North America, South America, Europe, Middle East amp Africa, and Asia Pacific 8212 are since at least 2000 when we began reporting specific business unit results
The chart below shows our 2015 Company pre tax results by Automotive business unit, along with Other Automotive which is mainly net interest expense, and our Financial Services sector
We achieved a record Company full year pre tax profit of 10
Collectively, our operations outside of North America were profitable and every business unit, with the exception of South America, was profitable in 2015
In Europe, we earned 259 million, reflecting the progress of our Transformation Plan announced in 2012
North America and Ford Credit continued to deliver benchmark profitability
And as shown below the chart, all business units improved compared to 2014
Vehicles sold to daily rental car companies that are subject to a guaranteed repurchase option i
, rental repurchase , as well as other sales of finished vehicles for which the recognition of revenue is deferred e
, consignments , also are included in wholesale unit volumes
For periods prior to 2016, China industry volume and market share are based on estimated wholesales
8226 SAAR 32 8211 seasonally adjusted annual rate 8226 Automotive Cash 8211 includes cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities net of securities in transit
Structural costs include the following cost categories 9702 Manufacturing, Including Volume Related 8211 32 consists primarily of costs for hourly and salaried manufacturing personnel, plant overhead such as utilities and taxes , and new product launch expense
dollars, iii effects of remeasuring monetary assets and liabilities of the relevant entities in currencies other than their functional currency, or iv results of our foreign currency hedging37Item 7
Shown above are the key market factors and financial metrics for our Automotive business for full year 2015
8 percent was the highest since at least the 1990s
Each of the key metrics improved compared to 2014 8226 Wholesale volume was up 5 , 8226 Automotive revenue was up 4 , or 9 at constant exchange, 8226 Automotive operating margin was up 2
2 points or nearly 50 , and 8226 Record full year Automotive pre tax profit, at 8
3 , was up two tenths of a percentage point with gains in South America and Europe
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued As shown above, our full year Automotive pre tax profit improved by 3
4 billion of favorable market factors, reflecting the success of our new product launches, our Asia Pacific growth strategy, as well as industry growth in North America and Europe
Cost increases were mainly product related costs and manufacturing and engineering expense that supported our growth in 2015, and will support further growth in 2016 and beyond
For 2015 and 2014, total costs and expenses, including special items, for our Automotive sector were 134
The detail for the change is shown below in billions   2015Lower Higher 2014Volume and mix, exchange, and other  1
4Contribution costs   Material excluding commodities  3
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued North America had an outstanding year, with each of North America 8217 s key metrics improving compared with a year ago
We delivered substantial top line growth, operating margin at 10
The North America industry volume improved compared with a year ago the U
retail share increased one tenth of a percentage point to 13
0 driven by strong demand for our newest products, including F 150 and Mustang
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Favorable volume and mix and higher net pricing drove North America 8217 s pre tax profit higher than a year ago
Higher costs, including a one time ratification bonus in Other related to the UAW agreement in the fourth quarter, and unfavorable exchange were partial offsets
With the 16 global product launches last year, we expect about 45 of our wholesales in 2016 to be from products that we launched since January 2015
We achieved our highest annual sales in the United States since 2005
Ford remained the best selling vehicle brand in the United States and Ford F Series was the best selling vehicle in the United States for the 34th straight year
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued     Wholesale volume, revenue, and operating margin were each lower than a year ago, reflecting the continued deterioration of the business environment in South America
Despite the tough conditions, South America 8217 s pre tax loss for the full year was reduced by 332 million, or 29 , compared to last year
6 , was up seven tenths of a percentage point reflecting our strong performance in Brazil with the all new Ka
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The full year pre tax loss in South America was less severe than a year ago, reflecting higher net pricing and market share, partially offset by lower industry
Our team in the region continues to work on all areas of the business to counter the effects of the difficult business environment and position ourselves to be able to recover quickly once conditions begin to improve
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued With the exception of revenue, which was impacted adversely by the strong U
dollar, all metrics for the full year were better than a year ago
The Europe industry volume was 600,000 units higher compared to a year ago, more than explained by the improvement in the Europe 20 markets
Our total Europe market share in the region was up five tenths of a percentage point to 7
7 , reflecting the strength of EcoSport and Mondeo and geographic mix
In 2015, Ford became Europe 8217 s best selling commercial vehicle brand, reflecting the strength of our renewed Transit line up and Ranger as well as our dedicated dealer network support
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued In Europe, our full year pre tax profit was 259 million, up over 850 million compared to a year ago
The improvement in Europe reflects favorable market factors and improved costs flowing through to the bottom line, partially offset by unfavorable exchange and the consolidation of Ford Sollers, our joint venture in Russia
Returning to profitability in 2015 reflected the progress of our Transformation Plan announced in 2012
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Our pre tax results and operating margin improved from a year ago, reflecting higher net pricing offset by lower volume
Wholesale volume and revenue declined compared to a year ago
The industry volume for the region was flat and our market share declined one tenth of a percentage point due to industry growth in markets in which we do not participate
Market share was higher compared to 2014 in the major markets in which we do participate
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued In Asia Pacific, we had our best year yet as we continue to execute our growth strategy
Asia Pacific achieved record volume, revenue, operating margin, and pre tax profit in 2015, mainly reflecting the strength of our new products, including the all new three row Edge, Figo, Everest, Lincoln MKX, Taurus, and new Ranger
5 billion to pre tax profit in 2015, reflecting our equity share of the unconsolidated joint ventures 8217 after tax earnings this was 234 million higher than last year
5 million units, up 800,000 units from a year ago, more than explained by an increase in the China industry volume
For the full year, both our Asia Pacific regional market share of 3
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Asia Pacific delivered an outstanding year with a record pre tax profit of 765 million, up 29 from a year ago
Favorable volume was driven by strong industry in China, where we were able to leverage the government incentive program with our strong line up of vehicles with 1
Higher mix reflected the strength of our new products, highlighted by the performance of the locally produced all new three row Edge
Higher structural cost was a partial offset to the improvement, as we continue to invest for further growth in the region
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued 2014 Compared with 2013The charts on the following pages detail 2014 key metrics and the change in 2014 pre tax results compared with 2013 by causal factor for our Automotive sector and its operating segments 8212 North America, South America, Europe, Middle East amp Africa, and Asia Pacific
As shown above, full year wholesale volume was about equal to 2013
Automotive sector revenue was lower than in 2013 by 3 , more than explained by lower volume from consolidated operations and unfavorable exchange
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Lower pre tax profit was driven by the Americas all other business units improved
Higher costs, including warranty, unfavorable exchange, and lower volume, including product launch effects and supplier parts shortages, more than explain the decline
For 2014 and 2013, total costs and expenses, including special items, for our Automotive sector were 136
9 billion, respectively, a difference of 9 billion
The detail for the change is shown below in billions   2014Lower Higher 2013Volume and mix, exchange, and other  2
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued In 2014, Automotive pre tax profit was driven by profits in North America and record results in Asia Pacific
Middle East amp Africa was about breakeven, while Europe and South America incurred large losses as expected
Other Automotive primarily reflects net interest expense
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued As shown above, North America 8217 s full year wholesale volume and revenue both declined 5 compared with 2013
4 percentage points lower than in 2013, while pre tax profit was 7
market share was down 1 percentage point, primarily reflecting lower F 150 share as we prepared for the all new vehicle by balancing share with transaction prices and stocks, as well as a planned reduction in daily rental sales
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The decrease in pre tax profit for 2014 compared with 2013 is more than explained by lower volume and higher costs, including warranty
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued As shown above, full year wholesale volume and revenue deteriorated compared with 2013 by 14 and 19 , respectively
The deterioration in all metrics was driven by unfavorable changes in the external factors mentioned above
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The decrease in pre tax profit for 2014 compared with 2013 is more than explained by unfavorable exchange, higher costs primarily driven by higher inflation , and lower volume, offset partially by favorable net pricing
The higher net pricing reflects partial recovery of the adverse effects of high local inflation and weaker local currencies, along with pricing associated with our new products
The full year loss includes 426 million of adverse balance sheet exchange effects, related primarily to the devaluation of the Venezuela bolivar in the first quarter
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Europe 8217 s full year wholesale volume and revenue were up 5 and 8 , respectively, compared with 2013
4 percentage point improvement in our commercial vehicle share, to 11
4 , reflecting the success of our full line of new Transit vehicles and continued strong performance of the Ranger compact pick up
For the year, Europe retail share of the retail passenger car industry for the five major markets was 8
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The improvement in pre tax results is more than explained by higher volume and lower cost, offset partially by Russia and other factors, including lower component pricing and parts and accessories profits
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Middle East amp Africa 8217 s full year wholesale volume and revenue were down 4 and 3 , respectively, compared with 2013
5 and the pre tax loss was 20 million, both improved from 2013
The improvement in pre tax results is more than explained by higher net pricing and favorable mix
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued As shown above, all full year metrics improved from 2013 and all were records
Wholesale volume improved 13 compared with 2013, while revenue, which excludes our China joint ventures, improved 5
Our wholesale volume in China, not shown, was up 19
3 percentage points, and pre tax profit was 593  million, up 262 million
As shown in the memo, our China joint ventures contributed 1
3 billion to pre tax profit in 2014, reflecting our equity share of earnings after tax
The balance of results for the region primarily reflect Australia where we have been implementing our transformation plan India where we have been investing for future growth, including the launch of two plants in 2014 and industry and economic factors in ASEAN
The improvement was driven by China, where our market share for the full year rose to a record 4
4  percentage points compared with 2013, reflecting continued strong sales across our vehicle line up
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The improvement in 2014 pre tax results primarily reflects favorable market factors, offset partially by higher costs, including investments to support future growth, and unfavorable exchange
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTORFord Credit has two operations, North America and International
In general, we measure year over year changes in Ford Credit 8217 s pre tax results using the causal factors listed below 8226 Volume and Mix 9702 Volume primarily measures changes in net financing margin driven by changes in average finance receivables and net investment in operating leases at prior period financing margin yield defined below in financing margin at prior period exchange rates
9702 Mix primarily measures changes in net financing margin driven by period over period changes in the composition of Ford Credit 8217 s average managed receivables by product and by country or region
8226 Financing Margin 9702 Financing margin variance is the period to period change in financing margin yield multiplied by the present period average receivables at prior period exchange rates
This calculation is performed at the product and country level and then aggregated
Financing margin yield equals revenue, less interest expense and scheduled depreciation for the period, divided by average receivables for the same period
9702 Financing margin changes are driven by changes in revenue and interest expense
Changes in revenue are primarily driven by the level of market interest rates, cost assumptions in pricing, mix of business, and competitive environment
Changes in interest expense are primarily driven by the level of market interest rates, borrowing spreads, and asset liability management
8226 Credit Loss 32 9702 Credit loss is the change in the provision for credit losses at prior period exchange rates
For analysis purposes, management splits the provision for credit losses primarily into net charge offs and the change in the allowance for credit losses
9702 Net charge off changes are primarily driven by the number of repossessions, severity per repossession, and recoveries
Changes in the allowance for credit losses are primarily driven by changes in historical trends in credit losses and recoveries, changes in the composition and size of Ford Credit 8217 s present portfolio, changes in trends in historical used vehicle values, and changes in economic conditions
For additional information on the allowance for credit losses, refer to the 8220 Critical Accounting Estimates 32 Allowance for Credit Losses 8221 section below
8226 Lease Residual 32 9702 Lease residual measures changes to residual performance at prior period exchange rates
For analysis purposes, management splits residual performance primarily into residual gains and losses, and the change in accumulated supplemental depreciation
9702 Residual gain and loss changes are primarily driven by the number of vehicles returned to Ford Credit and sold, and the difference between the auction value and the depreciated value of the vehicles sold
Changes in accumulated supplemental depreciation are primarily driven by changes in Ford Credit 8217 s estimate of the number of vehicles that will be returned to it and sold, and changes in the estimate of the expected auction value at the end of the lease term
For additional information on accumulated supplemental depreciation, refer to the 8220 Critical Accounting Estimates 32 Accumulated Depreciation on Vehicles Subject to Operating Leases 8221 section below
8226 Exchange 9702 Reflects changes in pre tax results driven by the effects of converting functional currency income to U
8226 Other 32 9702 Primarily includes operating expenses, other revenue, and insurance expenses at prior period exchange rates
9702 Changes in operating expenses are primarily driven by salaried personnel costs, facilities costs, and costs associated with the origination and servicing of customer contracts
9702 In general, other revenue changes are primarily driven by changes in earnings related to market valuation adjustments to derivatives primarily related to movements in interest rates , and other miscellaneous items
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued 2015 Compared with 2014Ford Credit
32 32 The chart below details the key metrics for Ford Credit for full year 2015
Ford Credit had another outstanding year with pre tax profit of 2
Ford Credit continues to support our growth with contract volume up 8 in 2015 and year end managed receivables of 127 billion, up 14 billion from 2014
Managed receivables equal net finance receivables of 96
9 billion and net investment in operating leases of 25
5 billion reported on Ford Credit 8217 s balance sheet at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, excluding unearned interest supplements and residual support of 4
4 billion, and other primarily accumulated supplemental depreciation of 0
1 billion at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively
Ford Credit 8217 s purchase policy remains consistent along with a relentless focus on originations, servicing, and collections
As a result, its portfolio performance continues to be robust with the loss to receivables ratio at the low end of Ford Credit 8217 s historical experience
Ford Credit is a strategic asset, supporting Ford 8217 s sales around the world with a strong balance sheet and outstanding operating performance
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The chart below details the change in 2015 pre tax results compared with 2014 by causal factor for Ford Credit
Ford Credit 8217 s 2015 pre tax profit improved compared with 2014
The improvement is more than explained by favorable volume and mix, driven by growth in all products globally
Higher credit losses and the adverse effect of the stronger U
The higher credit losses, primarily in North America, reflect reserve increases in 2015 compared with reserve releases in 2014
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued 2014 Compared with 2013Ford Credit
32 32 The chart below details the change in 2014 pre tax results compared with 2013 by causal factor
The improvement of 98 million in pre tax profit in 2014 compared with 2013 is more than explained by favorable volume and mix, driven by increases in consumer and non consumer finance receivables globally, as well as an increase in operating leases in North America
Partial offsets include lower financing margin, reflecting primarily lower portfolio pricing in North America and a one time reserve in Europe, and unfavorable lease residual performance in North America, resulting from lower relative auction values
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCESAutomotive SectorOur Automotive liquidity strategy includes ensuring that we have sufficient liquidity available with a high degree of certainty throughout the business cycle by generating cash from operations and maintaining access to other sources of funding
We target to have an average ongoing Automotive cash balance of about 20 billion
We expect to have periods when we will be above or below this amount due to i future cash flow expectations such as for pension contributions, debt maturities, capital investments, or restructuring requirements, ii short term timing differences, and iii  changes in the global economic environment
In addition, we also target to maintain a revolving credit facility for our Automotive business of about 10 billion to protect against exogenous shocks
We assess the appropriate long term target for total Automotive liquidity, comprised of Automotive cash and the revolving credit facility, to be about 30 billion, which is an amount we believe is sufficient to support our business priorities and to protect our business
Our Automotive cash and Automotive liquidity targets could be reduced over time based on improved operating performance and changes in our risk profile
For a discussion of risks to our liquidity, see 8220 Item 1A
Risk Factors, 8221 as well as Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements, regarding commitments and contingencies that could impact our liquidity
Our key liquidity metrics are Automotive cash, Automotive liquidity, and operating related cash flow which best represents the ability of our Automotive operations to generate cash
Automotive cash is detailed below as of the dates shown in  billions  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31,2013Cash and cash equivalents 5
8 a The purchase or sale of marketable securities for which the cash settlement was not made by period end and a payable or receivable was recorded on the balance sheet
Our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities are held primarily in highly liquid investments, which provide for anticipated and unanticipated cash needs
Our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities primarily include U
Department of Treasury obligations, federal agency securities, bank time deposits with investment grade institutions, corporate investment grade securities, commercial paper rated A 1 P 1 or higher, and debt obligations of a select group of non U
governmental agencies, and supranational institutions
The average maturity of these investments ranges from about 90 days to up to about one year, and is adjusted based on market conditions and liquidity needs
We monitor our cash levels and average maturity on a daily basis
Of our total Automotive cash at December  31,  2015, consolidated entities domiciled in the United States held 84
Automotive cash and liquidity as of the dates shown were as follows in billions  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31,2013Automotive cash 23
8Available credit lines      Revolving credit facility, unutilized portion10
7Local lines available to foreign affiliates, unutilized portion0
2In managing our business, we classify changes in Automotive cash into operating related and other items which includes the impact of certain special items, contributions to funded pension plans, certain tax related transactions, acquisitions and divestitures, capital transactions with the Financial Services sector, dividends paid to shareholders, and other 8212 primarily financing related
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued We believe the cash flow analysis reflected in the table below is useful to investors because it includes in operating related cash flow elements that we consider to be related to our Automotive operating activities e
, capital spending and excludes cash flow elements that we do not consider to be related to the ability of our operations to generate cash
This differs from a cash flow statement prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States 8220 GAAP 8221 and differs from Net 32 cash provided by used in operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure
Changes in Automotive cash are summarized below in  billions  2015  2014  2013Automotive cash at end of period 23
5       Automotive pre tax profits excluding special items 8
5 a Working capital is comprised of changes in receivables, inventory, and trade payables
b Primarily expense and payment timing differences for items such as pension and OPEB, compensation, marketing, warranty, and timing differences between unconsolidated affiliate profits and dividends received
Also includes other factors, such as the impact of tax payments and vehicle financing activities between Automotive and Financial Services sectors
c Primarily distributions from Ford Holdings Ford Credit 8217 s parent and tax payments received from Ford Credit
d 2014 includes one time unfavorable cash effect associated with the accounting change for our operations in Venezuela
e In 2014, we used 2 billion in cash to settle repurchases of approximately 116 million shares of Ford Common Stock
With respect to 8220 Changes in working capital, 8221 in general we carry relatively low Automotive sector trade receivables compared with our trade payables because the majority of our Automotive wholesales are financed primarily by Ford Credit immediately upon sale of vehicles to dealers, which generally occurs at the time the vehicles are gate released shortly after being produced
In addition, our inventories are lean because we build to order, not for inventory
In contrast, our Automotive trade payables are based primarily on industry standard production supplier payment terms generally ranging between 30  days to 45 days
As a result, our cash flow tends to improve as wholesale volumes increase, but can deteriorate significantly when wholesale volumes drop sharply
These working capital balances generally are subject to seasonal changes that can impact cash flow
For example, we typically experience cash flow timing differences associated with inventories and payables due to our annual summer and December shutdown periods, when production, and therefore inventories and wholesale volumes, are usually at their lowest levels, while payables continue to come due and be paid
The net impact of this typically results in cash outflows from changes in our working capital balances during these shutdown periods
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Shown below is a reconciliation between financial statement Net cash provided by used in operating activities and operating related cash flows calculated as shown in the table above , as of the dates shown in billions  2015  2014  2013Net cash provided by used in operating activities 12
7Items included in operating related cash flows      Capital spending 7
3 Items not included in operating related cash flows      Separation payments0
0Tax refunds, tax payments, and tax receipts from affiliates 8212  0
Lenders under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015 and as further amended the 8220 revolving credit facility 8221 have commitments to us totaling 13
4 billion, with 75 of the commitments maturing on April  30,  2020 and 25 of the commitments maturing on April 30, 2018
We have allocated 3  billion of commitments to Ford Credit on an irrevocable and exclusive basis to support its growth and liquidity
Any borrowings by Ford Credit under the revolving credit facility would be guaranteed by us
The revolving credit facility is unsecured and free of material adverse change conditions to borrowing, restrictive financial covenants for example, interest or fixed charge coverage ratio, debt to equity ratio, and minimum net worth requirements , and credit rating triggers that could limit our ability to obtain funding
The revolving credit facility contains a liquidity covenant that requires us to maintain a minimum of 4 billion in aggregate of domestic cash, cash equivalents, and loaned and marketable securities and or availability under the revolving credit facility
If our senior, unsecured, long term debt does not maintain at least two investment grade ratings from Fitch, Moody 8217 s, and S amp P each as defined under 8220 Total Company 8221 below , the guarantees of certain subsidiaries will be required
At December 31, 2015, the utilized portion of the revolving credit facility was 48 million, representing amounts utilized as letters of credit
Department of Energy 8220 DOE 8221 Advanced Technology Vehicle Manufacturer 8220 ATVM 8221 Incentive Program
See Note 13 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information regarding the ATVM loan
5 billion of local credit facilities available to non U
Automotive affiliates, of which 836 million had been utilized
32 32 Our Automotive sector net cash calculation as of the dates shown was as follows in billions  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31,2013Automotive cash 23
1Total debt at December 31, 2015 was 1 billion lower than at December  31, 2014
The reduction primarily represents debt repayments, offset partially by the addition of the external debt of Ford Sollers, our joint venture in Russia, as a result of the consolidation of the joint venture on March 31, 2015, and higher local funding in Brazil
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Pension Plan Contributions and Strategy
Worldwide, our defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by 8
2  billion at December 31, 2015, an improvement of 1
6 billion from December 31, 2014, due to higher discount rates and favorable exchange partially offset by asset returns in the United States
weighted average discount rate increased 33  basis points to 4
weighted average discount rate increased 14 basis points to 3
7 billion, or about 70 , is associated with our unfunded plans
Our strategy is to reduce the risk of our funded defined benefit pension plans, including minimizing the volatility of the value of our pension assets relative to pension liabilities and the need for unplanned use of capital resources to fund the plans
The strategy reduces balance sheet, cash flow, and income exposures and, in turn, reduces our risk profile
On December 31, 2015, we adopted a change in accounting method for our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans
Ford will recognize pension and OPEB remeasurement gains and losses in the year incurred generally in the fourth quarter rather than amortizing them over many years
The remeasurement will be reported as a special item since it is not reflective of the underlying operating results of our automotive business
The change in accounting method will have no effect on our funding requirements, cash flows, or employees 8217 pension or OPEB benefits
See Note 1 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information on the change in accounting
In 2015, consistent with our plan, we contributed 1
1 billion to our global funded pension plans most of which were mandatory contributions , a decrease of 0
5  billion from Automotive cash to our global funded pension plans including discretionary contributions of about 400  million
We also expect to make about 300 million of benefit payments to participants in unfunded plans, for a combined total of 1
Based on current assumptions and regulations, we do not expect to have a legal requirement to fund our major U
After 2016, we expect contributions to our global funded plans to be limited to ongoing service cost of about 500 to 700 million per year
8 reflecting fixed income losses as interest rates rose, partially offset by positive growth asset returns
plans at year end 2015 was 77 , unchanged from year end 2014
7 , reflecting fixed income gains, strongly positive growth asset returns, and favorable exchange
plans at year end 2015 was 73 , 6  percentage points higher than year end 2014
For a detailed discussion of our pension plans, see Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
We manage Automotive debt levels with a leverage framework to maintain strong, investment grade credit ratings through a normal business cycle
The leverage framework includes a ratio of Automotive debt, underfunded pension liabilities, operating leases, and other adjustments, divided by Automotive income before income tax, adjusted for depreciation, amortization, Automotive interest, and other adjustments
Ford Credit 8217 s leverage is calculated as a separate business as described in the Liquidity Financial Services section of Item 7
Ford Credit is self funding and its debt, which is used to fund its operations, is separate from our Automotive debt
One of the four key priorities of our One Ford plan is to finance our plan and maintain a strong balance sheet, while at the same time having resources available to grow our business
Based on our planning assumptions, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to continue to invest in new products and services that customers want and value, transform and grow our business, pay our debts and obligations as and when they come due, pay a sustainable dividend, and provide protection within an uncertain global economic environment
Based on expected cash flows and the identification of additional opportunities for profitable growth, the ongoing amount of capital spending to support product development, growth, restructuring, and infrastructure is expected to increase to about 9 billion annually by 2020
4  billion in 2015 and 2014, respectively, and is expected to be about 7
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Financial Services SectorFord CreditFunding Overview
32 32 Ford Credit 8217 s primary funding and liquidity objective is to maintain a strong investment grade balance sheet with adequate liquidity to support its financing activities and growth under a variety of market conditions, including short term and long term market disruptions
Ford Credit 8217 s funding strategy remains focused on diversification, and it plans to continue accessing a variety of markets, channels, and investors
Ford Credit 8217 s liquidity profile continues to be diverse, robust, and focused on maintaining liquidity levels that meet its business and funding requirements
Ford Credit regularly stress tests its balance sheet and liquidity to ensure that it continues to meet its financial obligations through economic cycles
Ford Credit 8217 s funding sources include primarily unsecured debt and securitization transactions including other structured financings
Ford Credit issues both short term and long term debt that is held by both institutional and retail investors, with long term debt having an original maturity of more than 12  months
Ford Credit sponsors a number of securitization programs that can be structured to provide both short term and long term funding through institutional investors in the United States and international capital markets
Ford Credit obtains short term unsecured funding from the sale of floating rate demand notes under its Ford Interest Advantage program and by issuing unsecured commercial paper in the United States and other international markets
At December 31, 2015, the principal amount outstanding of Ford Interest Advantage notes, which may be redeemed at any time at the option of the holders thereof without restriction, was 5
At December  31,  2015, the principal amount outstanding of Ford Credit 8217 s unsecured commercial paper was 1
7 billion, which primarily represents issuance under its commercial paper program in the United States
Ford Credit maintains multiple sources of readily available liquidity to fund the payment of its unsecured short term debt obligations
32 32 The following table shows Ford Credit 8217 s planned issuances for full year 2016, and its global public term funding issuances in 2015, 2014, and 2013 in billions , excluding short term funding programs  Public Term Funding Plan  2016Forecast  2015  2014  2013Unsecured 14 18  17  13  11Securitizations a 12 15  13  15  14Total 26 33  30  28  25 a Includes Rule 144A offerings
In 2015, Ford Credit completed 30 billion of public term funding in the United States, Canada, Europe, Mexico, China, and Australia including 17 billion of unsecured debt and 13 billion of securitizations
For 2016, Ford Credit projects full year public term funding in the range of 26 billion to 33 billion, consisting of 14  billion to 18 billion of unsecured debt and 12 billion to 15 billion of public securitizations
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Funding Portfolio
32 32 The chart below shows the trends in funding for Ford Credit 8217 s managed receivables At year end 2015, managed receivables were 127  billion, and Ford Credit ended the year with 11 billion in cash
Securitized funding was 39 of managed receivables
Ford Credit is projecting 2016 year end managed receivables of 134 billion to 139 billion and securitized funding as a percent of managed receivables to be between 37 and 40
Ford Credit expects this percentage to decline over time quarterly and annual movements reflect the calendarization of Ford Credit 8217 s funding plan
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Liquidity
32 32 The following table shows Ford Credit 8217 s liquidity sources and utilization in billions  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31, 2013Liquidity Sources      Cash a 11
3       Utilization of Liquidity      Securitization cash c 4
4 Ford revolving credit facility allocation 8212  8212  8212 Total utilization of liquidity 25
4 a Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities excludes marketable securities related to insurance activities
b Committed asset backed security 8220 ABS 8221 facilities are subject to availability of sufficient assets, ability to obtain derivatives to manage interest rate risk, and exclude FCE Bank plc 8220 FCE 8221 access to the Bank of England 8217 s Discount Window Facility
c Used only to support on balance sheet securitization transactions
d Adjustments include other committed ABS facilities in excess of eligible receivables and certain cash within FordREV available through future sales of receivables
At December  31, 2015, Ford Credit had total liquidity sources of 49
7 billion compared with total liquidity sources of 46
Its liquidity sources of committed capacity and cash are diversified across a variety of markets and platforms
6 billion reflects higher securitization cash and usage of its committed ABS facilities
Ford Credit ended 2015 with gross liquidity of 24 billion
5 billion, total liquidity available for use continues to remain strong at 23
5  billion at year end 2015, 3  billion lower than year end 2014
32 Ford Credit uses leverage, or the debt to equity ratio, to make various business decisions, including evaluating and establishing pricing for finance receivable and operating lease financing, and assessing its capital structure
Ford Credit refers to its shareholder 8217 s interest as equity
The following table shows the calculation of Ford Credit 8217 s financial statement leverage in billions, except for ratios  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31, 2013Total debt a 119
3 a Includes debt issued in securitization transactions and payable only out of collections on the underlying securitized assets and related enhancements
Ford Credit holds the right to receive the excess cash flows not needed to pay the debt issued by, and other obligations of, the securitization entities that are parties to those securitization transactions
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued The following table shows the calculation of Ford Credit 8217 s managed leverage in billions, except for ratios  December 31, 2015  December 31, 2014  December 31, 2013Total debt a 119
5 a Includes debt issued in securitization transactions and payable only out of collections on the underlying securitized assets and related enhancements
Ford Credit holds the right to receive the excess cash flows not needed to pay the debt issued by, and other obligations of, the securitization entities that are parties to those securitization transactions
b Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities excludes marketable securities related to insurance activities
c Primarily related to market valuation adjustments to derivatives due to movements in interest rates
Adjustments to debt are related to designated fair value hedges and adjustments to equity are related to retained earnings
d Equals total adjusted debt over total adjusted equity
Ford Credit believes that managed leverage is useful to its investors because it reflects the way Ford Credit manages its business
Ford Credit deducts cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities excluding marketable securities related to insurance activities because they generally correspond to excess debt beyond the amount required to support its operations and amounts to support on balance sheet securitization transactions
Ford Credit makes derivative accounting adjustments to its assets, debt, and equity positions to reflect the impact of interest rate instruments Ford Credit uses in connection with its term debt issuances and securitization transactions
The derivative accounting adjustments related to these instruments vary over the term of the underlying debt and securitized funding obligations based on changes in market interest rates
Ford Credit generally repays its debt obligations as they mature
As a result, Ford Credit excludes the impact of these derivative accounting adjustments on both the numerator and denominator in order to exclude the interim effects of changes in market interest rates
Ford Credit plans its managed leverage by considering prevailing market conditions and the risk characteristics of its business
At December  31,  2015, Ford Credit 8217 s managed leverage was 9
7 1 at December  31,  2014, reflecting the strength of the U
dollar and year end receivables at the top end of the forecasted range
In 2016, Ford Credit expects managed leverage to return to the upper end of the targeted range of 8 1 to 9 1
In 2015, Ford Credit paid 250  million in distributions to its parent, Ford Holdings LLC
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Total CompanyEquity
The increase primarily reflects favorable changes in Retained earnings of 5 billion related to full year 2015 Net  income attributable to Ford Motor Company of 7
4 billion favorable changes in Capital in excess of par value of stock related to compensation related equity issuances of 332  million offset partially by unfavorable changes in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss of about 1  billion more than explained by unfavorable foreign currency translation adjustments and an increase in Treasury stock 32 of 129  million
Our short term and long term debt is rated by four credit rating agencies designated as nationally recognized statistical rating organizations 8220 NRSROs 8221 by the  U
Securities and Exchange Commission 8226 DBRS Limited 8220 DBRS 8221 8226 Fitch, Inc
8220 Fitch 8221 8226 Moody 8217 s Investors Service, Inc
8220 Moody 8217 s 8221 and 8226 Standard amp Poor 8217 s Ratings Services, a division of McGraw Hill Financial 8220 S amp P 8221
In several markets, locally recognized rating agencies also rate us
A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the credit risk associated with a corporate entity or particular securities issued by that entity
Rating agencies 8217 ratings of us are based on information provided by us and other sources
Credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold securities, and are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency
Each rating agency may have different criteria for evaluating company risk and, therefore, ratings should be evaluated independently for each rating agency
The following rating actions were taken by these NRSROs since the filing of our Quarterly Report on Form 10 Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 8226 On November 23, 2015, S amp P affirmed its ratings for Ford and Ford Credit, and revised the outlook to positive from stable
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Return on Invested Capital
32 We analyze total company performance using a Return on Invested Capital 8220 ROIC 8221 financial metric based on an after tax rolling five year average basis, which we believe is appropriate given our industry 8217 s product and investment cycles
The following table contains the calculation of our five year average ROIC for the years shown 74Item 7
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued 2015 PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS AND KEY METRICS The following summarizes results against planning assumptions and key metrics established at the beginning of 2015   2014 Full Year  2015 Full Year   Results  Plan  Results  Planning Assumptions  Mils
1            Key Metrics         Automotive Compared with 2014           Revenue Bils
3            Ford Credit Compared with 2014           Pre Tax Profit Bils
1            Total Company           Pre Tax Profit Bils
8  a China industry volume is based on estimated wholesales
b Excludes special items reconciliation to GAAP for full year 2014 and 2015 provided in 8220 Results of Operations 8221 and 8220 Liquidity and Capital Resources, 8221 above
c The 2015 plan was updated on January 7, 2016 in connection with the change in accounting method for our defined benefit and OPEB plans
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued OUTLOOKTotal CompanyOur 2016 outlook by segment is as follows  2015 Full YearResults  2016 Full Year PlanAutomotive Mils
North America 9,345   About Equal To 2015 Operating Margin Pct
5 or HigherSouth America 832   Greater Loss Than 2015Europe259   Higher Than 2015Middle East amp Africa31   Equal To or Higher Than 2015Asia Pacific765   Higher Than 2015Other Automotive 796   Loss of About 800 MillionFord Credit Mils
2,086   Equal To or Higher Than 20152016 Planning Assumptions and Key MetricsBased on the current economic environment, our planning assumptions and key metrics for 2016 include the following  2015 Full YearResults  2016 Full YearPlan  GDP Growth OutlookPlanning Assumptions  Mils
0         Key Metrics        Automotive          Revenue Bils
6   Equal To or Higher Than 2015      Operating Margin Pct
8  Equal To or Higher Than 2015      Operating Related Cash Flow Bils
3   Strong, but Lower Than 2015    Total Company Pre Tax Profit Bils
8   Equal To or Higher Than 2015    Operating Effective Tax Rate Pct
93   Equal To or Higher Than 2015        a Europe industry reflects total Europe, including Turkey and Russia
b Industry volume is based on estimated vehicle registrations
c Excludes special items reconciliation to GAAP for full year 2015 provided in 8220 Results of Operations 8221 and 8220 Liquidity and Capital Resources 8221 above
We expect continued benchmark profitability in North America in 2016 as we launch important high volume products, such as Escape, Fusion, and Super Duty, and pursue emerging opportunities through Ford Smart Mobility
In South America, we expect losses to be higher in 2016 as industry volumes reduce further and regional currencies weaken
We expect Europe 8217 s profit to grow in 2016 as we take further actions on costs to improve Europe 8217 s breakeven volume, help offset increasing regulatory costs, and invest in profitable, growing product segments and mobility services
We expect Middle East amp Africa to deliver results in 2016 that are equal to or higher than 2015 as we continue to implement the growth strategy we developed in 2015
We expect Asia Pacific 8217 s profits to be higher in 2016 and we expect industry growth in China, partially as a result of the purchase tax reduction introduced in 2015
Ford Credit expects its pre tax profit in 2016 to be equal to or higher than in 2015
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued We expect our operating effective tax rate to be in the low 30 percent range in 2016
In 2015, legislation was enacted in the fourth quarter that retroactively reinstated the U
research credit and other provisions of tax law that had expired
This late action contributed to our lower fourth quarter operating effective tax rate
The legislation made the research credit and certain other provisions permanent, which will eliminate the rate variability associated with such retroactive extensions of law
In total, we expect 2016 to be another outstanding year
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Risk FactorsStatements included or incorporated by reference herein may constitute 8220 forward looking statements 8221 within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
We cannot be certain that any expectation, forecast, or assumption made in preparing forward looking statements will prove accurate, or that any projection will be realized
It is to be expected that there may be differences between projected and actual results
Our forward looking statements speak only as of the date of their initial issuance, and we do not undertake any obligation to update or revise publicly any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise
Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors
In addition, there are other items within our financial statements that require estimation, but are not deemed critical as defined above
Changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our financial statements
Warranty and Field Service ActionsNature of Estimates Required
32 32 We provide warranties on the products we sell
Separately, we also periodically perform field service actions related to safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns
Pursuant to these warranties and field service actions, we will repair, replace or adjust all parts on a vehicle that are defective in factory supplied materials or workmanship
We accrue the estimated cost of both basic warranty coverages and field service actions at the time of sale
32 32 We establish estimates for warranty and field service action obligations using a patterned estimation model
We use historical information regarding the nature, frequency, and average cost of claims for each vehicle line by model year
We reevaluate our estimate of warranty and field service obligations on a regular basis
Experience has shown that initial data for any given model year may be volatile therefore, our process relies on long term historical averages until sufficient data are available
As actual experience becomes available, we use the data to modify the historical averages in order to ensure that the estimate is within the range of likely outcomes
We then compare the resulting accruals with present spending rates to ensure that the balances are adequate to meet expected future obligations
Based on these data, we revise our estimates as necessary
Warranty coverages vary therefore, our warranty accruals vary depending upon the type of product and the geographic location of its sale for specific periods of time and or mileage
Field service actions are distinguishable from warranties in that they may occur in periods beyond the basic warranty coverage period
Our best estimate of the obligation related to field service actions includes expected future payments related to vehicles produced in the most recent eight model years and announced field service actions for vehicles produced before this period
Due to the uncertainty and potential volatility of these factors, changes in our assumptions could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations
See Note 27 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for information regarding warranty and product recall related costs
Pensions and Other Postretirement Employee Benefits Nature of Estimates Required
32 32 The estimation of our defined benefit pension and OPEB plan obligations and expenses requires that we make use of estimates of the present value of the projected future payments to all participants, taking into consideration the likelihood of potential future events such as demographic experience and health care cost increases
Plan obligations and expenses are based on existing retirement plan provisions
No assumption is made regarding any potential future changes to benefit provisions beyond those to which we are presently committed e
32 32 The assumptions used in developing the required estimates include the following key factors 8226 Discount rates
32 32 Our discount rate assumption is based primarily on the results of a cash flow matching analysis, which matches the future cash outflows for each major plan to a yield curve based on high quality bonds specific to the country of the plan
Benefit payments are discounted at the rates on the curve to determine the year end obligations
Beginning in 2016, we changed the approach used to estimate the service and interest components of net periodic benefit cost for pension and OPEB for plans that utilize a yield curve approach
With this refinement, we will measure service and interest costs by applying the specific spot rates along that yield curve to the relevant projected cash flows for each component
We believe the new approach provides a more precise measurement of service and interest costs
This refinement has no effect on the measurement of our plan obligations or on full year pension and OPEB expense as lower service and interest costs recorded quarterly are offset in the fourth quarter remeasurement
We have accounted for this as a change in accounting estimate and accordingly, have accounted for it on a prospective basis
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued 8226 Expected long term rate of return on plan assets
32 32 Our expected long term rate of return assumption reflects the historical returns and long run inputs from a range of advisors for capital market returns, inflation, bond yields, and other variables, adjusted for specific aspects of our investment strategy such as asset mix
The assumption is based on consideration of all inputs, with a focus on long term trends to avoid short term market influences
32 32 Our salary growth assumption reflects our actual experience, long term outlook, and assumed inflation
32 32 Our inflation assumption is based on an evaluation of external market indicators, including real gross domestic product growth and central bank inflation targets
Our expected amount and timing of contributions are based on an assessment of minimum requirements, cash availability, and other considerations e
, funded status, avoidance of regulatory premiums and levies, and tax efficiency
Retirement rates are developed to reflect actual and projected plan experience
Mortality rates are developed to reflect actual and projected plan experience
Our health care cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near term outlook, and an assessment of likely long term trends
Assumptions are set at each year end and are generally not changed during the year unless there is a major plan event such as a significant curtailment or settlement that would trigger a plan remeasurement
On December 31, 2015, we adopted a change in accounting method for our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans retrospectively
See Note 1 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information
With this change, the effects of actual results differing from our assumptions and the effects of changing assumptions remeasurement gain loss are recognized within net periodic benefit costs in the period of remeasurement
See Note  12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding pension and OPEB costs and assumptions
The year end 2015 weighted average discount rate was 4
plans, reflecting increases of 33 and 14 basis points, respectively, compared with year end 2014
8 , which was lower than the expected long term rate of return of 6
7 , which was higher than the expected long term rate of return of 6
asset returns reflect the impact of a change in valuation technique for Ford Werke pension plan assets see Note 12 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information
In total, these differences, in addition to demographic and other updates, resulted in a net loss of 1  billion which has been recognized within net periodic benefit cost and reported as a special item within the Automotive sector
For 2016, the expected long term rate of return on assets is 6
plans, down 55 basis points compared with a year ago, reflecting primarily a higher fixed income allocation
Worldwide pension costs, excluding special items, was income of about 300 million in 2015, about 500 million better than 2014, driven primarily by lower interest costs and strong asset returns at year end 2014
Based on year end assumptions, we expect 2016 pension expense to be similar to 2015
In 2012, we adopted a broad global de risking strategy which increases the matching characteristics of our assets relative to our obligation as funded status improves
Changes in interest rates which directly influence changes in discount rates , in addition to other factors, have a significant impact on the value of our pension obligation and fixed income asset portfolio
As we de risk our plans and increase the allocation to fixed income investments over time, we expect the funded status sensitivity to changes in interest rates will be significantly reduced
Changes in interest rates should result in offsetting effects in the value of our pension obligation and the value of the fixed income asset portfolio
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Sensitivity Analysis
The December  31, 2015 pension funded status and 2016 expense are affected by year end 2015 assumptions
Sensitivities to these assumptions may be asymmetric and are specific to the time periods noted
The effects of changes in the factors which generally have the largest impact on year end funded status and pension expense are discussed below
Discount rates and interest rates have the largest impact on our net funded status
The table below estimates the impact as of December 31, 2015 on our funded status of an increase decrease in discount rates and interest rates in millions   Basis  Increase Decrease in   Point  December 31, 2015 Funded StatusFactor  Change  U
4,500 5,500  4,000 5,100 Interest rate fixed income assets  100  4,200 5,200  2,600 3,200Net impact on funded status    300 300  1,400 1,900 The fixed income asset sensitivity shown excludes other fixed income return components e
, bond coupon and active management excess returns , and growth asset returns
Discount rates and the expected long term rate of return on assets have the largest impact on pension expense
These assumptions are generally set at each year end for expense recorded throughout the following year
The table below estimates the impact on 2016 pension expense of a higher lower assumption for these factors in millions   Basis  Increase Decrease in   Point  2016 ExpenseFactor  Change  U
PlansDiscount rate service cost and interest cost  25 bps
30 30  5 5 Expected long term rate of return on assets  25    100 100    60 60The impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities
The sensitivity of pension expense to an increase in discount rates assumptions may not be linear
Other Postretirement Employee BenefitsEffect of Actual Results
The weighted average discount rate used to determine the benefit obligation for U
86 at December  31,  2014, resulting in a worldwide gain of about 300  million which has been recognized within net periodic benefit cost and reported as a special item within the Automotive sector
Discount rates have the largest impact on our OPEB obligation and expense
The table below estimates the impact on 2016 pension expense of higher lower assumptions for these factors in millions     Worldwide OPEB   Basis  Increase Decrease 2015 YE Obligation  Increase Decrease 2016 Expense   Point   Factor  Change   Discount rate obligation  100 bps
600 700  N ADiscount rate service cost and interest cost  25  N A    5 5 Income TaxesNature of Estimates Required
We must make estimates and apply judgment in determining the provision for income taxes for financial reporting purposes
We make these estimates and judgments primarily in the following areas i the calculation of tax credits, ii the calculation of differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes that will ultimately be reported in tax returns, as well as iii the calculation of interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions
Changes in these estimates and judgments may result in a material increase or decrease to our tax provision, which would be recorded in the period in which the change occurs
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Assumptions and Approach Used
We are subject to the income tax laws and regulations of the many jurisdictions in which we operate
These tax laws and regulations are complex and involve uncertainties in the application to our facts and circumstances that may be open to interpretation
We recognize benefits for these uncertain tax positions based upon a process that requires judgment regarding the technical application of the laws, regulations, and various related judicial opinions
If, in our judgment, it is more likely than not that the uncertain tax position will be settled favorably to us, we estimate an amount that ultimately will be realized
This process is inherently subjective, since it requires our assessment of the probability of future outcomes
We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis, including consideration of changes in facts and circumstances, such as new regulations or recent judicial opinions, as well as the status of audit activities by taxing authorities
Changes to our estimate of the amount to be realized are recorded in our provision for income taxes during the period in which the change occurred
We must also assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets against future sources of taxable income
GAAP requires a reduction of the carrying amount of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on all available evidence, it is more likely than not defined as a likelihood of more than 50 that all or a portion of such assets will not be realized
We presently believe that a valuation allowance of 1
8 billion is required, primarily for deferred tax assets related to our South America operations
We believe that we ultimately will recover the remaining 11  billion of deferred tax assets
We have assessed recoverability of these assets, and concluded that no valuation allowance is required
For additional information regarding income taxes, see Note 21 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
Allowance for Credit LossesThe allowance for credit losses represents Ford Credit 8217 s estimate of the probable credit loss inherent in finance receivables and operating leases as of the balance sheet date
The adequacy of Ford Credit 8217 s allowance for credit losses is assessed quarterly and the assumptions and models used in establishing the allowance are evaluated regularly
Because credit losses can vary substantially over time, estimating credit losses requires a number of assumptions about matters that are uncertain
See Note  7 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding allowance for credit losses
Ford Credit estimates the probable credit losses inherent in finance receivables and operating leases based on several factors
Ford Credit estimates the allowance for credit losses on consumer receivables and on operating leases using a combination of measurement models and management judgment
The models consider factors such as historical trends in credit losses and recoveries including key metrics such as delinquencies, repossessions, and bankruptcies , the composition of Ford Credit 8217 s present portfolio including vehicle brand, term, risk evaluation, and new used vehicles , trends in historical used vehicle values, and economic conditions
Estimates from these models rely on historical information and may not fully reflect losses inherent in the present portfolio
Therefore, Ford Credit may adjust the estimate to reflect management judgment regarding observable changes in recent economic trends and conditions, portfolio composition, and other relevant factors
Ford Credit 8217 s allowance for credit losses is based on assumptions regarding  8226 Frequency
32 32 The number of finance receivables and operating lease contracts that are expected to default over the loss emergence period, measured as repossessions and 8226 Loss severity
32 32 The expected difference between the amount a customer owes when the finance contract is charged off and the amount received, net of expenses, from selling the repossessed vehicle, including any recoveries from the customer
The collective allowance is evaluated primarily using a collective loss to receivables 8220 LTR 8221 model that, based on historical experience, indicates credit losses have been incurred in the portfolio even though the particular accounts that are uncollectible cannot be specifically identified
The LTR model is based on the most recent years of history
Each LTR is calculated by dividing credit losses by average finance receivables or average operating leases, excluding unearned interest supplements and allowance for credit losses
An average LTR is calculated for each product and multiplied by the end of period balances for that given product
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Ford Credit 8217 s largest markets also use a loss projection model to estimate losses inherent in the portfolio
The loss projection model applies recent monthly performance metrics, stratified by contract type retail or lease , contract term e
, 60 month , and risk rating to Ford Credit 8217 s active portfolio to estimate the losses that have been incurred
The loss emergence period 8220 LEP 8221 is a key assumption within Ford Credit 8217 s models and represents the average amount of time between when a loss event first occurs to when it is charged off
This time period starts when the consumer begins to experience financial difficulty
It is evidenced, typically through delinquency, before eventually resulting in a charge off
The LEP is a multiplier in the calculation of the collective consumer allowance for credit losses
For accounts greater than 120 days past due, the uncollectible portion is charged off, such that the remaining recorded investment is equal to the estimated fair value of the collateral less costs to sell
Consumer receivables involved in Troubled Debt Restructurings are specifically assessed for impairment
A specific allowance is estimated based on the present value of the expected future cash flows of the receivable discounted at the contracts original effective interest rate or the fair value of any collateral adjusted for estimated costs to sell
After establishing the collective and specific allowance for credit losses, if Ford Credit management believes the allowance does not reflect all losses inherent in the portfolio due to changes in recent economic trends and conditions, or other relevant factors, an adjustment is made based on management judgment
Changes in the assumptions used to derive frequency and severity would affect the allowance for credit losses
The effect of the indicated increase decrease in the assumptions for Ford Credit 8217 s U
Ford and Lincoln brand retail financing and operating lease portfolio is as follows in millions, except for percentages     Increase Decrease Assumption  PercentagePoint Change  December 31, 2015Allowance forCredit Losses  2016ExpenseRepossession ratios a  0
0  4 4  4 4 a Reflects the number of finance receivables and operating lease contracts that Ford Credit expects will default over a period of time relative to the average number of contracts outstanding
Ford Credit estimates the allowance for credit losses for non consumer receivables based on historical LTR ratios, expected future cash flows, and the fair value of collateral
32 32 Ford Credit estimates an allowance for non consumer receivables that are not specifically identified as impaired using a LTR model for each financing product based on historical experience
This LTR is an average of the most recent historical experience and is calculated consistent with the consumer receivables LTR approach
All accounts that are specifically identified as impaired are excluded from the calculation of the non specific or collective allowance
32 32 Dealer financing is evaluated by segmenting individual loans by the risk characteristics of the loan such as the amount of the loan, the nature of the collateral, and the financial status of the debtor
The loans are analyzed to determine whether individual loans are impaired, and a specific allowance is estimated based on the present value of the expected future cash flows of the receivable discounted at the loan 8217 s original effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral adjusted for estimated costs to sell
After establishing the collective and specific allowance for credit losses, if Ford Credit management believes the allowance does not reflect all losses inherent in the portfolio due to changes in recent economic trends and conditions, or other relevant factors, an adjustment is made based on management judgment
Changes in Ford Credit 8217 s assumptions affect the Provision for credit losses and insurance losses on our income statement and the allowance for credit losses contained within Finance receivables, net and Net investment in 32 operating leases on our balance sheet, in each case under the Financial Services sector
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued Accumulated Depreciation on Vehicles Subject to Operating Leases  Accumulated depreciation on vehicles subject to operating leases reduces the value of the leased vehicles in Ford Credit 8217 s operating lease portfolio from their original acquisition value to their expected residual value at the end of the lease term
Ford Credit monitors residual values each month, and it reviews the adequacy of accumulated depreciation on a quarterly basis
If Ford Credit believes that the expected residual values for its vehicles have changed, it revises depreciation to ensure that net investment in operating leases equal to the acquisition value of the vehicles less accumulated depreciation will be adjusted to reflect Ford Credit 8217 s revised estimate of the expected residual value at the end of the lease term
Such adjustments to depreciation expense would result in a change in the depreciation rates of the vehicles subject to operating leases and are recorded prospectively on a straight line basis
Each lease customer has the option to buy the leased vehicle at the end of the lease or to return the vehicle to the dealer
32 Each operating lease in Ford Credit 8217 s portfolio represents a vehicle it owns that has been leased to a customer
At the time Ford Credit purchases a lease, it establishes an expected residual value for the vehicle
Ford Credit estimates the expected residual value by evaluating recent auction values, return volumes for its leased vehicles, industrywide used vehicle prices, marketing incentive plans, and vehicle quality data
Ford Credit 8217 s accumulated depreciation on vehicles subject to operating leases is based on assumptions regarding  8226 Auction value
32 32 Ford Credit 8217 s projection of the market value of the vehicles when sold at the end of the lease and 8226 Return volume
32 32 Ford Credit 8217 s projection of the number of vehicles that will be returned at lease end
See Note  6 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding accumulated depreciation on vehicles subject to operating leases
For returned vehicles, Ford Credit faces a risk that the amount it obtains from the vehicle sold at auction will be less than its estimate of the expected residual value for the vehicle
The effect of the indicated increase decrease in the assumptions for Ford Credit 8217 s U
Ford and Lincoln brand operating lease portfolio is as follows in millions, except for percentages     Increase Decrease Assumption  PercentageChange  December 31, 2015AccumulatedDepreciation onVehicles Subject toOperating Leases  2016ExpenseFuture auction values  1
0  13 13  6 6 The impact of the increased accumulated supplemental depreciation in 2015 would be charged to expense in the 2016 2019 periods
Adjustments to the amount of accumulated depreciation on operating leases would be reflected on our balance sheet as Net investment in operating leases and on the income statement in Depreciation on vehicles subject to operating leases, in each case under the Financial Services sector
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued ACCOUNTING STANDARDS ISSUED BUT NOT YET ADOPTEDThe Financial Accounting Standards Board 8220 FASB 8221 has issued the following standards, which are not expected to have a material impact with the exception of standard 2014 09 to our financial statements or financial statement disclosures
b For additional information see Note 3 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
Management 8217 s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Continued AGGREGATE CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONSWe are party to many contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties
Most of these are debt obligations incurred by our Financial Services sector
Long term debt may have fixed or variable interest rates
For long term debt with variable rate interest, we estimate the future interest payments based on projected market interest rates for various floating rate benchmarks received from third parties
In addition, as part of our normal business practices, we enter into contracts with suppliers for purchases of certain raw materials, components, and services to facilitate adequate supply of these materials and services
These arrangements may contain fixed or minimum quantity purchase requirements
8220 Purchase obligations 8221 are defined as off balance sheet agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on the Company and that specify all significant terms
c Amounts represent our estimate of contractually obligated deficit contributions to U
See Note 12 for further information regarding our expected 2016 pension contributions and funded status
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits for 2015 of 1
6  billion see Note 21 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional discussion is excluded from the table above
Final settlement of a significant portion of these obligations will require bilateral tax agreements among us and various countries, the timing of which cannot reasonably be estimated
For additional information regarding operating lease obligations, pension and OPEB obligations, and long term debt, see Notes 6, 12, and 13, respectively, of the Notes to the Financial Statements
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market RiskOVERVIEWWe are exposed to a variety of market and other risks, including the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates, as well as risks to availability of funding sources, hazard events, and specific asset risks
These risks affect our Automotive and Financial Services sectors differently
We monitor and manage these exposures as an integral part of our overall risk management program, which includes regular reports to a central management committee, the Global Risk Management Committee 8220 GRMC 8221
The GRMC is chaired by our Chief Financial Officer, and its members include our Treasurer, our Corporate Controller, and other members of senior management
Our Automotive and Financial Services sectors are exposed to liquidity risk, including the possibility of having to curtail business or being unable to meet financial obligations as they come due because funding sources may be reduced or become unavailable
Our plan is to maintain funding sources to ensure liquidity through a variety of economic or business cycles
As discussed in greater detail in Item  7, our funding sources include sales of receivables in securitizations and other structured financings, unsecured debt issuances, equity and equity linked issuances, and bank borrowings
We are exposed to a variety of insurable risks, such as loss or damage to property, liability claims, and employee injury
We protect against these risks through the purchase of commercial insurance that is designed to protect us above our self insured retentions against events that could generate significant losses
Direct responsibility for the execution of our market risk management strategies resides with our Treasurer 8217 s Office and is governed by written policies and procedures
Separation of duties is maintained between the development and authorization of derivative trades, the transaction of derivatives, and the settlement of cash flows
Regular audits are conducted to ensure that appropriate controls are in place and that they remain effective
In addition, our market risk exposures and our use of derivatives to manage these exposures are approved by the GRMC, and reviewed by the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors
In accordance with our corporate risk management policies, we use derivative instruments, when available, such as forward contracts, swaps and options that economically hedge certain exposures foreign currency, commodity, and interest rates
We do not use derivative contracts for trading, market making, or speculative purposes
In certain instances, we forgo hedge accounting, and in certain other instances, our derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting
Either situation results in unrealized gains and losses that are recognized in income
For additional information on our derivatives, see Note  16 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
The market and counterparty risks of our Automotive sector and Ford Credit are discussed and quantified below
AUTOMOTIVE MARKET AND COUNTERPARTY RISK  Our Automotive sector frequently has expenditures and receipts denominated in foreign currencies, including the following purchases and sales of finished vehicles and production parts, debt and other payables, subsidiary dividends, and investments in foreign operations
These expenditures and receipts create exposures to changes in exchange rates
We also are exposed to changes in prices of commodities used in our Automotive sector and changes in interest rates
Foreign currency risk, commodity risk, and interest rate risk are measured and quantified using a model to evaluate the sensitivity of market value to instantaneous, parallel shifts in rates and or prices
32 32 Foreign currency risk is the possibility that our financial results could be better or worse than planned because of changes in currency exchange rates
Accordingly, our normal practice is to use derivative instruments, when available, to hedge our economic exposure with respect to forecasted revenues and costs, assets, liabilities, and firm commitments denominated in foreign currencies
In our hedging actions, we use derivative instruments commonly used by corporations to reduce foreign exchange risk e
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Continued                     The net fair value of foreign exchange forward contracts including adjustments for credit risk , as of December  31,  2015, was an asset of 322 million compared with a liability of 130  million as of December  31,  2014
The potential decrease in fair value from a 10 adverse change in the underlying exchange rates, in U
The sensitivity analysis presented is hypothetical and assumes foreign exchange rate changes are instantaneous and adverse across all currencies
In reality, foreign exchange rates move in different magnitudes and at different times, and any changes in fair value would generally be offset by changes in the underlying exposure
See Note 16 of the Notes to the Financial Statements for more information regarding our foreign currency exchange contracts
Commodity price risk is the possibility that our financial results could be better or worse than planned because of changes in the prices of commodities used in the production of motor vehicles, such as base metals e
,  natural gas and electricity , and plastics resins e
Accordingly, our normal practice is to use derivative instruments, when available, to hedge the price risk with respect to forecasted purchases of those commodities that we can economically hedge primarily base metals and precious metals
In our hedging actions, we use derivative instruments commonly used by corporations to reduce commodity price risk e
The net fair value of commodity forward contracts including adjustments for credit risk as of December  31, 2015 was a liability of 24 million compared with a liability of 66 million as of December  31, 2014
The potential decrease in fair value from a 10 adverse change in the underlying commodity prices, in U
dollar terms, would be 62  million at December  31, 2015, compared with 63  million at December  31, 2014
In addition, our purchasing organization with guidance from the GRMC as appropriate negotiates contracts to ensure continuous supply of raw materials
In some cases, these contracts stipulate minimum purchase amounts and specific prices, and, therefore, play a role in managing price risk
Interest rate risk relates to the gain or loss we could incur in our Automotive investment portfolios due to a change in interest rates
Our interest rate sensitivity analysis on the investment portfolios includes cash and cash equivalents and net marketable securities
6  billion in our Automotive investment portfolios, compared to 21
We invest the portfolios in securities of various types and maturities, the value of which are subject to fluctuations in interest rates
The portfolios are classified as trading portfolios and gains and losses unrealized and realized are reported in the income statement
The investment strategy is based on clearly defined risk and liquidity guidelines to maintain liquidity, minimize risk, and earn a reasonable return on the short term investments
In investing our Automotive cash, safety of principal is the primary objective and risk adjusted return is the secondary objective
At any time, a rise in interest rates could have a material adverse impact on the fair value of our portfolios
Assuming a hypothetical increase in interest rates of one percentage point, the value of our portfolios would be reduced by about 186  million as calculated as of December 31, 2015
This compares to 148 million, as calculated as of December  31,  2014
While these are our best estimates of the impact of the specified interest rate scenario, actual results could differ from those projected
The sensitivity analysis presented assumes interest rate changes are instantaneous, parallel shifts in the yield curve
In reality, interest rate changes of this magnitude are rarely instantaneous or parallel
Counterparty risk relates to the loss we could incur if an obligor or counterparty defaulted on an investment or a derivative contract
We enter into master agreements with counterparties that allow netting of certain exposures in order to manage this risk
Exposures primarily relate to investments in fixed income instruments and derivative contracts used for managing interest rate, foreign currency exchange rate, and commodity price risk
We, together with Ford Credit, establish exposure limits for each counterparty to minimize risk and provide counterparty diversification
Our approach to managing counterparty risk is forward looking and proactive, allowing us to take risk mitigation actions before risks become losses
Exposure limits are established based on our overall risk tolerance and estimated loss projections which are calculated from ratings based historical default probabilities and market based credit default swap 8220 CDS 8221 spreads
32 32 The exposure limits are lower for lower rated counterparties, counterparties that have relatively higher CDS spreads, and for longer dated exposures
32 32 Our exposures are monitored on a regular basis and included in periodic reports to our Treasurer
Substantially all of our counterparty exposures are with counterparties that have an investment grade rating
Investment grade is our guideline for counterparty minimum long term ratings
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Continued                     FORD CREDIT MARKET RISK  Overview
Ford Credit is exposed to a variety of risks in the normal course of its business activities
Each form of risk is uniquely managed in the context of its contribution to Ford Credit 8217 s overall global risk
Business decisions are evaluated on a risk adjusted basis and services are priced consistent with these risks
A discussion of Ford Credit 8217 s market risks interest rate risk and foreign currency risk is included below
Generally, Ford Credit 8217 s assets and the related debt have different re pricing periods, and consequently, respond differently to changes in interest rates
Ford Credit 8217 s assets consist primarily of fixed rate retail installment sale and operating lease contracts and floating rate wholesale receivables
Fixed rate retail installment sale and operating lease contracts generally require customers to make equal monthly payments over the life of the contract
Wholesale receivables are originated to finance new and used vehicles held in dealers 8217 inventory and generally require dealers to pay a floating rate
Debt consists primarily of short and long term unsecured debt and securitizations
In the case of unsecured term debt, and in an effort to have funds available throughout business cycles, Ford Credit may borrow at terms longer than the terms of its assets, in most instances with maturities up to ten years
These debt instruments are principally fixed rate and require fixed and equal interest payments over the life of the instrument and a single principal payment at maturity
Ford Credit 8217 s interest rate risk management objective is to reduce volatility in its cash flows and volatility in its economic value from changes in interest rates based on an established risk tolerance that may vary by market
Ford Credit uses economic value sensitivity analysis and re pricing gap analysis to evaluate potential long term effects of changes in interest rates
It then enters into interest rate swaps to convert portions of its floating rate debt to fixed or its fixed rate debt to floating to ensure that Ford Credit 8217 s exposure falls within the established tolerances
Ford Credit also uses pre tax cash flow sensitivity analysis to monitor the level of near term cash flow exposure
The pre tax cash flow sensitivity analysis measures the changes in expected cash flows associated with Ford Credit 8217 s interest rate sensitive assets, liabilities, and derivative financial instruments from hypothetical changes in interest rates over a twelve month horizon
Ford Credit 8217 s Asset Liability Committee reviews the re pricing mismatch and exposure every month and approves interest rate swaps required to maintain exposure within approved thresholds prior to execution
To provide a quantitative measure of the sensitivity of its pre tax cash flow to changes in interest rates, Ford Credit uses interest rate scenarios that assume a hypothetical, instantaneous increase or decrease of one percentage point in all interest rates across all maturities a 8220 parallel shift 8221 , as well as a base case that assumes that all interest rates remain constant at existing levels
In reality, interest rate changes are rarely instantaneous or parallel and rates could move more or less than the one percentage point assumed in Ford Credit 8217 s analysis
As a result, the actual impact to pre tax cash flow could be higher or lower than the results detailed in the table below
These interest rate scenarios are purely hypothetical and do not represent Ford Credit 8217 s view of future interest rate movements
Under these interest rate scenarios, Ford Credit expects more assets than debt and liabilities to re price in the next twelve months
Other things being equal, this means that during a period of rising interest rates, the interest earned on Ford Credit 8217 s assets will increase more than the interest paid on Ford Credit 8217 s debt, thereby initially increasing Ford Credit 8217 s pre tax cash flow
During a period of falling interest rates, Ford Credit would expect its pre tax cash flow to initially decrease
Ford Credit 8217 s pre tax cash flow sensitivity to interest rate movement is highlighted in the table below
While the sensitivity analysis presented is Ford Credit 8217 s best estimate of the impacts of the specified assumed interest rate scenarios, its actual results could differ from those projected
The model Ford Credit uses to conduct this analysis is heavily dependent on assumptions
Embedded in the model are assumptions regarding the reinvestment of maturing asset principal, refinancing of maturing debt, replacement of maturing derivatives, exercise of options embedded in debt and derivatives, and predicted repayment of retail installment sale and lease contracts ahead of contractual maturity
Ford Credit 8217 s repayment projections ahead of contractual maturity are based on historical experience
If interest rates or other factors change, Ford Credit 8217 s actual prepayment experience could be different than projected
Ford Credit 8217 s policy is to minimize exposure to changes in currency exchange rates
To meet funding objectives, Ford Credit borrows in a variety of currencies, principally U
dollars, Canadian dollars, Euros, Pound Sterling, and renminbi
Ford Credit faces exposure to currency exchange rates if a mismatch exists between the currency of receivables and the currency of the debt funding those receivables
When possible, receivables are funded with debt in the same currency, minimizing exposure to exchange rate movements
When a different currency is used, Ford Credit may use foreign currency swaps and foreign currency forwards to convert substantially all of its foreign currency debt obligations to the local country currency of the receivables
As a result of this policy, Ford Credit believes its market risk exposure, relating to changes in currency exchange rates at December 31, 2015, is insignificant
32 The net fair value of Ford Credit 8217 s derivative financial instruments as of December  31, 2015 was an asset of 681 million, compared to an asset of 692 million as of December  31, 2014
The Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, our Financial Statements, the accompanying Notes to the Financial Statements, and the Financial Statement Schedule that are filed as part of this Report are listed under 8220 Item  15
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules 8221 and are set forth beginning on page FS 1 immediately following the signature pages of this Report
Selected quarterly financial data for 2015 and 2014 are provided in Note  26 of the Notes to the Financial Statements
32 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Management 8217 s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Exchange Act Rule 13a 15 f
The Company 8217 s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or because the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our CEO and CFO, we conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015
The assessment was based on criteria established in the framework Internal Control Integrated Framework 2013 , issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
Based on this assessment, management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December  31,  2015
The effectiveness of the Company 8217 s internal control over financial reporting as of December  31,  2015 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report included herein
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
On December 31, 2015, we adopted a method to recognize pension and OPEB remeasurement gains and losses in the year incurred rather than amortizing them over many years
In addition, fair value is used to calculate the expected return on plan assets
We previously used a market related value of plan assets that recognized changes in fair value over time to calculate the expected return on plan assets
Directors, Executive Officers of Ford, and Corporate Governance
The information required by Item 10 regarding our directors is incorporated by reference from the information under the captions 8220 Election of Directors, 8221 8220 Section 16 a Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance, 8221 and 8220 Management Stock Ownership 8221 in our Proxy Statement
The information required by Item 10 regarding our executive officers appears as Item  4A under Part I of this Report
The information required by Item 10 regarding an audit committee financial expert is incorporated by reference from the information under the caption 8220 Corporate Governance 8211 Audit Committee Financial Expert and Auditor Rotation 8221 in our Proxy Statement
The information required by Item 10 regarding the members of our Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is incorporated by reference from the information under the captions 8220 Proxy Summary, 8221 8220 Corporate Governance 8211 Board Committee Functions, 8221 8220 Audit Committee Financial Expert and Auditor Rotation 8221 and 8220 Proposal 1 8211 Election of Directors 8221 in our Proxy Statement
The information required by Item 10 regarding the Audit Committee 8217 s review and discussion of the audited financial statements is incorporated by reference from information under the caption 8220 Audit Committee Report 8221 in our Proxy Statement
The information required by Item 10 regarding our codes of ethics is incorporated by reference from the information under the caption 8220 Corporate Governance 8211 Codes of Ethics 8221 in our Proxy Statement
In addition, we have included in Item 1 instructions for how to access our codes of ethics on our website and our Internet address
Amendments to, and waivers granted under, our Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Personnel, if any, will be posted to our website as well
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information required by Item 12 is incorporated by reference from the information under the captions 8220 Equity Compensation Plan Information 8221 and 8220 Corporate Governance 8211 Beneficial Stock Ownership 8221 in our Proxy Statement
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required by Item 13 is incorporated by reference from the information under the captions 8220 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions 8221 and 8220 Corporate Governance 8211 Independence of Directors and Relevant Facts and Circumstances 8221 in our Proxy Statement
The information required by Item 14 is incorporated by reference from the information under the caption 8220 Audit Committee Fees 8221 in our Proxy Statement
Financial Statements 8211 Ford Motor Company and SubsidiariesThe following are contained in this 2015 Form 10 K Report 8226 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
8226 Consolidated Income Statement and Sector Income Statement for the years ended December  31,  2015, 2014, and 2013
8226 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013
8226 Consolidated Balance Sheet and Sector Balance Sheet at December 31, 2015 and 2014
8226 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows and Sector Statement of Cash Flows for the years ended December  31,  2015, 2014, and 2013
8226 Consolidated Statement of Equity for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013
The Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, the Consolidated and Sector Financial Statements, and the Notes to the Financial Statements listed above are filed as part of this Report and are set forth beginning on page FS 1 immediately following the signature pages of this Report
Financial Statement SchedulesDesignationDescriptionSchedule IIValuation and Qualifying AccountsSchedule II is filed as part of this Report and is set forth on page FSS 1 immediately following the Notes to the Financial Statements referred to above
The other schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, the information required to be contained in them is disclosed elsewhere on our Consolidated and Sector Financial Statements or the amounts involved are not sufficient to require submission
ExhibitsDesignation  Description  Method of FilingExhibit 3 A  Restated Certificate of Incorporation, dated August  2,  2000
Filed as Exhibit 3 A to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2000
Exhibit 3 A 1  Certificate of Designation of Series A Junior Participating Preferred Stock filed on September  11,  2009
1 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed September 11, 2009
Exhibit 4 A  Tax Benefit Preservation Plan 8220 TBPP 8221 dated September  11,  2009 between Ford Motor Company and Computershare Trust Company,  N
1 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed September 11, 2009
Filed as Exhibit 4 to our Current Report on Form 8 K filed September 12, 2012
3 to our Current Report on Form 8 K filed September 11, 2015
Exhibit 10 A  Executive Separation Allowance Plan as amended and restated effective as of January  1,  2012
Filed as Exhibit 10 A to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
Exhibit 10 B  Deferred Compensation Plan for Non Employee Directors, as amended and restated as of January  1,  2012
Filed as Exhibit 10 B to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2011
Exhibit 10 C  2014 Stock Plan for Non Employee Directors  Filed as Exhibit 10 C to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2013
Exhibit 10 D  Benefit Equalization Plan, as amended and restated as of January  1,  2012
Filed as Exhibit 10 C to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
93Designation  Description  Method of FilingExhibit 10 E  Description of financial counseling services provided to certain executives
Filed as Exhibit 10 F to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2002
Exhibit 10 F  Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, amended and restated effective as of January  1,  2013
Filed as Exhibit 10 E to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
Exhibit 10 F 1  Defined Contribution Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, effective January 1, 2013
Filed as Exhibit 10 E 1 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
Exhibit 10 G  Description of Director Compensation as of July  13,  2006
Filed as Exhibit 10 G 3 to our Quarterly Report on Form  10 Q for the quarter ended September  30,  2006
Exhibit 10 G 1  Amendment to Description of Director Compensation as of February  8,  2012
Filed as Exhibit 10 F 3 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2011
Exhibit 10 G 2  Amendment to Description of Director Compensation as of July 1, 2013
Filed as Exhibit 10 G 2 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2013
1 to our Quarterly Report on Form  10 Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2008
Exhibit 10 I  Description of Matching Gift Program and Vehicle Evaluation Program for Non Employee Directors
Filed as Exhibit 10 I to our Annual Report on  Form  10 K A for the year ended December  31,  2005
Exhibit 10 J  Non Employee Directors Life Insurance and Optional Retirement Plan as amended and restated as of December  31,  2010
Filed as Exhibit 10 I to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2010
Exhibit 10 K  Description of Non Employee Directors Accidental Death, Dismemberment and Permanent Total Disablement Indemnity
Filed as Exhibit 10 S to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  1992
Exhibit 10 K 1  Description of Amendment to Basic Life Insurance and Accidental Death amp Dismemberment Insurance
Filed as Exhibit 10 K 1 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2013
Exhibit 10 L  Description of Compensation Arrangements for Mark Fields
Filed as Exhibit 10 L to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2014
Exhibit 10 L 1  Description of Compensation Arrangements for Alan Mulally
Filed as Exhibit 10 L 1 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2014
Exhibit 10 M  Select Retirement Plan, amended and restated effective as of January 1,  2014
Filed as Exhibit 10 M to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2013
Exhibit 10 N  Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated as of December  31,  2010
Filed as Exhibit 10 M to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2010
Exhibit 10 N 1  Suspension of Open Enrollment in Deferred Compensation Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 M 1 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2009
Exhibit 10 O  Annual Incentive Compensation Plan, as amended and restated as of March  1,  2008
2 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10 Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2008
Exhibit 10 O 1  Amendment to the Ford Motor Company Annual Incentive Compensation Plan effective as of December  31,  2008
Filed as Exhibit 10 N 1 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 O 2  Annual Incentive Compensation Plan Metrics for 2014
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 4 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2013
Exhibit 10 O 3  Annual Incentive Compensation Plan Metrics for 2015
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 5 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2014
Exhibit 10 O 4  Annual Incentive Compensation Plan Metrics for 2016
Exhibit 10 O 5  Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Metrics for 2012
Filed as Exhibit 10 N 9 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2011
Exhibit 10 O 6  Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Metrics for 2013
Filed as Exhibit 10 N 9 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2012
Exhibit 10 O 7  Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Metrics for 2014
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 9 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2013
Exhibit 10 O 8  Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Metrics for 2015
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 11 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2014
Exhibit 10 O 9  Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Metrics for 2016
Exhibit 10 O 10  Executive Compensation Recoupment Policy
Filed as Exhibit 10 N 8 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2010
Filed as Exhibit 10 N 9 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2010
Exhibit 10 P  1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended and restated effective as of January  1,  2003
Filed as Exhibit 10 R to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2002
Exhibit 10 P 1  Amendment to Ford Motor Company 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan effective as of January  1,  2006
Filed as Exhibit 10 P 1 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K A for the year ended December  31,  2005
Exhibit 10 P 2  Form of Stock Option Agreement NQO with Terms and Conditions
Filed as Exhibit 10 P 2 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K A for the year ended December  31,  2005
94Designation  Description  Method of FilingExhibit 10 P 3  Form of Stock Option NQO Terms and Conditions for 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 3 to our Annual Report onForm 10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 4  Form of Stock Option NQO Agreement for 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 4 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 5  Form of Stock Option Agreement ISO with Terms and Conditions
Filed as Exhibit 10 P 3 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K A for the year ended December  31,  2005
Exhibit 10 P 6  Form of Stock Option ISO Terms and Conditions for 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 6 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 7  Form of Stock Option Agreement ISO for 2008  Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 7 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Filed as Exhibit 10 P 4 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K A for the year ended December  31,  2005
Terms and Conditions for 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 9 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2009
Exhibit 10 P 10  Form of Stock Option Agreement U
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 10 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2009
Exhibit 10 P 11  Form of Restricted Stock Grant Letter
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 14 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 12  Form of Restricted Stock Grant Letter as of January  1,  2011
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 12 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2010
Exhibit 10 P 13  Form of Final Award Notification Letter for Performance Based Restricted Stock Units
Exhibit 10 P 14  Form of Performance Based Restricted Stock Unit Opportunity Letter 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Exhibit 10 P 15  2008 Long Term Incentive Plan Restricted Stock Unit Agreement
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 22 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 16  2008 Long Term Incentive Plan Restricted Stock Unit Terms and Conditions
Exhibit 10 P 17  Form of Final Award Agreement for Performance Based Restricted Stock Units under 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Filed as Exhibit 10 O 26 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 P 18  Form of Final Award Terms and Conditions for Performance Based Restricted Stock Units under 2008 Long Term Incentive Plan
Exhibit 10 P 19  Form of Notification Letter for Time Based Restricted Stock Units
Exhibit 10 Q  Agreement dated January 13, 1999 between Ford Motor Company and Edsel B
Filed as Exhibit 10 X to our Annual Report on  Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  1998
Exhibit 10 Q 1  Amendment dated May  5,  2010 to the Consulting Agreement between Ford Motor Company and Edsel  B
3 to our Quarterly Report on Form  10 Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2010
Exhibit 10 Q 2  Amendment dated January 1, 2012 to the Consulting Agreement between Ford Motor Company and Edsel  B
Filed as Exhibit 10 P 2 to our Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2011
Exhibit 10 R  Amended and Restated Relationship Agreement dated April 30, 2015 between Ford Motor Company and Ford Motor Credit Company  LLC
2 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed May 1,  2015
Exhibit 10 S  Form of Trade Secrets Non Compete Statement between Ford and certain of its Executive Officers
Filed as Exhibit 10 V to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2003
Exhibit 10 T  Arrangement between Ford Motor Company and William  C
Filed as Exhibit 10 V to our Annual Report on  Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2008
Exhibit 10 U  2015 Incentive Compensation Grants Exclusion of Pension amp OPEB Accounting Change  Filed with this Report
Exhibit 10 V  Description of Company Practices regarding Club Memberships for Executives
Filed as Exhibit 10 BB to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2006
Exhibit 10 W  Accession Agreement between Ford Motor Company and James D
Filed as Exhibit 10 W to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
Agreement Amendment, effective as of October 12, 2008
Filed as Exhibit 10 W 1 to our Annual Report on Form  10 K for the year ended December  31,  2012
Exhibit 10 X  Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of November  24,  2009
2 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed November  25,  2009
Exhibit 10 X 1  Seventh Amendment dated as of March 15, 2012 to our Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2006, as amended and restated as of November 24, 2009, and as further amended
2 to our Current Report on Form 8 K filed March 15, 2012
Exhibit 10 X 2  Ninth Amendment dated as of April 30, 2013 to our Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2006, as amended and restated as of November 24, 2009, and as further amended
Filed as Exhibit 10 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10 Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013
95Designation  Description  Method of FilingExhibit 10 X 3  Tenth Amendment dated as of April 30, 2014 to our Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2006, as amended and restated as of November 24, 2009, and as further amended
1 to our Quarterly Report on Form 10 Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014
Exhibit 10 X 4  Eleventh Amendment dated as of April 30, 2015 to our Credit Agreement dated as of December 15, 2006, as amended and restated as of November 24, 2009, as amended and restated as of April 30, 2014, and as further amended, including the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
1 to our Current Report on Form 8 K filed May 1, 2015
Exhibit 10 Y  Loan Arrangement and Reimbursement Agreement between Ford Motor Company and the U
Department of Energy dated as of September  16,  2009
1 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed September 22, 2009
Exhibit 10 Z  Note Purchase Agreement dated as of September  16,  2009 among the Federal Financing Bank, Ford Motor Company, and the U
2 to our Current Report on Form  8 K filed September 22, 2009
Exhibit 12  Calculation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
Exhibit 18  Letter of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, dated February 11, 2016, relating to change in accounting principle
Exhibit 21  List of Subsidiaries of Ford as of January 31, 2016
Exhibit 23  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
CAL  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
LAB  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
PRE  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
DEF  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
Incorporated by reference as an exhibit to this Report file number reference 1 3950, unless otherwise indicated
Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
Submitted electronically with this Report in accordance with the provisions of Regulation S T
Instruments defining the rights of holders of certain issues of long term debt of Ford and of certain consolidated subsidiaries and of any unconsolidated subsidiary, for which financial statements are required to be filed with this Report, have not been filed as exhibits to this Report because the authorized principal amount of any one of such issues does not exceed 10 of the total assets of Ford and our subsidiaries on a consolidated basis
Ford agrees to furnish a copy of each of such instrument to the Securities and Exchange Commission upon request
96SIGNATUREPursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15 d of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, Ford has duly caused this Report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized
FORD MOTOR COMPANYBy s Stuart Rowley  Stuart Rowley, Vice President and Controller  principal accounting officer   Date February  11, 2016Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of Ford and in the capacities on the date indicated Signature  Title  Date      WILLIAM CLAY FORD, JR
Director, Chairman of the Board, Executive Chairman, Chair of the Office of the Chairman and Chief Executive, and Chair of the Finance Committee  February  11, 2016William Clay Ford, Jr
MARK FIELDS  Director, President and Chief Executive Officer  February  11, 2016Mark Fields  principal executive officer        STEPHEN G
BUTLER  Director and Chair of the Audit Committee  February  11, 2016Stephen G
Director and Chair of the Compensation Committee  February  11, 2016Anthony F
HELMAN IV  Director and Chair of the Sustainability Committee  February  11, 2016William W
Kennard          97Signature  Title  Date      JOHN C
SHAHEEN  Director and Chair of the Nominating and Governance Committee  February  11, 2016Gerald L
Thornton          BOB SHANKS  Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer  February  11, 2016Bob Shanks  principal financial officer         STUART ROWLEY  Vice President and Controller  February  11, 2016Stuart Rowley  principal accounting officer        By   s JONATHAN E
In addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule listed in the index appearing under Item 15 a 2 presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements
Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework 2013 32 issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission COSO
The Company 8217 s management is responsible for these financial statements and the financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in Management 8217 s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing under Item 9A
Our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements, on the financial statement schedule, and on the Company 8217 s internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board United States
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects
Our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation
Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for defined benefit pension and other postretirement employee benefit plans in 2015
The accompanying sector balance sheets and the related sector statements of income and of cash flows, included as supplemental information, have been subjected to audit procedures performed in conjunction with the audit of the Company 8217 s consolidated financial statements
The supplemental information is the responsibility of the Company 8217 s management
Our audit procedures included determining whether the supplemental information reconciles to the financial statements or the underlying accounting and other records, as applicable, and performing procedures to test the completeness and accuracy of the information presented in the supplemental information
In our opinion, the sector balance sheets and the related sector statements of income and of cash flows are fairly stated, in all material respects, in relation to the consolidated financial statements as a whole
A company 8217 s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate
01 per share 3,960 million shares issued of 6 billion authorized 40  39Class B Stock, par value
These assets and liabilities are included in the consolidated balance sheet above
See Note 15 32 for additional information on our VIEs
December  31, 2015  December  31, 2014ASSETS    Cash and cash equivalents 3,949  2,094Finance receivables, net45,902  39,522Net investment in operating leases13,309  9,631Other assets85  27LIABILITIES    Other liabilities and deferred revenue 19  22Debt43,086  37,156The accompanying notes are part of the financial statements
01 per share 3,960 million shares issued of 6 billion authorized 40  39Class B Stock, par value
01 per share 71 million shares issued of 530 million authorized 1  1Capital in excess of par value of stock21,421  21,089Retained earnings14,414  9,422Accumulated other comprehensive income loss Note  17 6,257  5,265 Treasury stock 977  848 Total equity attributable to Ford Motor Company28,642  24,438Equity attributable to noncontrolling interests15  27Total equity28,657  24,465Total liabilities and equity 227,902  210,531The accompanying notes are part of the financial statements
b     Reclassified to operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows
The accompanying notes are part of the financial statements
FS 7FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESCONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF EQUITY in millions  Equity Attributable to Ford Motor Company      Capital Stock  Cap
PRESENTATION 32 For purposes of this report, 8220 Ford, 8221 the 8220 Company, 8221 8220 we, 8221 8220 our, 8221 8220 us 8221 , or similar references mean Ford Motor Company, our consolidated subsidiaries, and our consolidated VIEs of which we are the primary beneficiary, unless the context requires otherwise
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States 8220 GAAP 8221
We present the financial statements on both a consolidated basis and on a sector basis for our Automotive and Financial Services sectors
The additional information provided in the sector statements enables the reader to better understand the operating performance, financial position, cash flows, and liquidity of our two very different businesses
We eliminate all intercompany items in the consolidated and sector balance sheets
In certain circumstances, presentation of these intercompany eliminations or consolidated adjustments differ between the consolidated and sector financial statements
These line items are reconciled below under 8220 Reconciliations between Consolidated and Sector Financial Statements 8221 or in the related financial statements and footnotes
We reclassified certain prior year amounts in our consolidated financial statements to conform to current year presentation
Change in AccountingPension and Other Postretirement Employee Benefits 8220 OPEB 8221
On December 31, 2015, we adopted a change in accounting method for certain components of expense related to our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans
Under the new method, we recognize remeasurement gains and losses immediately in net income and use fair value to calculate the expected return on plan assets
Historically, we recognized remeasurement gains and losses as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 and amortized them as a component of net periodic benefit cost, subject to a corridor, over the remaining service period of our active employees
In addition, we previously used a market related value of plan assets that recognized changes in fair value over time to calculate the expected return on plan assets
We believe this change in accounting method is preferable as it better recognizes the current performance of our pension and OPEB plans in our net income in the year incurred
Additionally, our segment reporting shown in Note 24 32 now provides better transparency into the underlying operating results of Ford 8217 s Automotive business units
We have retrospectively applied this change in accounting method to all prior periods
As of January 1, 2013, the cumulative effect of the change resulted in a decrease of 18  billion 32 in Retained earnings and an increase of 18  billion 32 in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss , both components of total equity in our consolidated and sector balance sheets
FS 10FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  1
21Diluted earnings per share attributable to Ford Motor Company0
FS 11FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  1
PRESENTATION 32 Continued In the first quarter of 2015, we recorded a 782  million 32 adjustment to correct for an understatement in the year end 2014 valuation of our U
The adjustment reduced Other assets 32 by 301  million 32 and increased Other liabilities and deferred revenue 32 by 481  million
The resulting after tax adjustment to Other comprehensive income 32 was a loss of 508  million
We originally determined this adjustment to be immaterial to our current or prior period financial statements
As a result of the change in accounting described above and the retrospective application to 2014, this after tax loss is now reported in the revised 2014 Net income 32 and also reflected in the related balance sheet amounts as of December 31, 2014
Reconciliations between Consolidated and Sector Financial StatementsSector to Consolidated Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
32 The difference between the total assets and total liabilities as presented on our sector balance sheet and consolidated balance sheet is the result of netting deferred income tax assets and liabilities
Certain Transactions Between Automotive and Financial Services SectorsIntersector transactions occur in the ordinary course of business
Additional detail regarding certain transactions and the effect on each sector 8217 s balance sheet at December 31 was as follows in billions  2015  2014  Automotive  FinancialServices  Automotive  FinancialServicesFinance receivables, net a   5
0Unearned interest supplements and residual support b   4
1  8212  8212 a Automotive sector receivables generated primarily from vehicle and parts sales to third parties sold to Ford Motor Credit Company LLC 8220 Ford Credit 8221
These receivables are classified as Other receivables, net 32 on our consolidated balance sheet and Finance receivables, net 32 on our sector balance sheet
b We pay amounts to Ford Credit at the point of retail financing or lease origination that represent interest supplements and residual support
c Primarily wholesale receivables with entities that are consolidated subsidiaries of Ford
d Sale leaseback agreement between Automotive and Financial Services sectors relating to vehicles that we lease to our employees
e Reflects amounts owed to the Financial Services sector by Automotive sector these amounts include the balances related to the Wholesale Other receivables 32 described above
FS 12FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  2
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 32 For each accounting topic that is addressed in its own footnote, the description of the accounting policy may be found in the related footnote
Other significant accounting policies are described below
Use of EstimatesThe preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect our results
Estimates are used to account for certain items such as marketing accruals, warranty costs, employee benefit programs, etc
Estimates are based on assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances
Due to the inherent uncertainty involved with estimates, actual results may differ
Foreign CurrencyWe remeasure monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a currency that is different from a reporting entity 8217 s functional currency from the transactional currency to the legal entity 8217 s functional currency
The effect of this remeasurement process, and the results of our foreign currency hedging activities are reported in Automotive cost of sales, Selling, administrative, and other expenses, and 32 Automotive interest income and other income, net
The pre tax losses for this activity were 524  million, 510  million, and 349  million, for the years ended 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
Generally, our foreign subsidiaries use the local currency as their functional currency
We translate the assets and liabilities of our foreign subsidiaries from their respective functional currencies to U
Changes in the carrying value of these assets and liabilities attributable to fluctuations in exchange rates are recognized in 32 Foreign currency translation, a component of Other comprehensive income Ioss
32 32 Upon sale or upon complete or substantially complete liquidation of an investment in a foreign subsidiary, the amount of accumulated foreign currency translation related to the entity is reclassified to income and recognized as part of the gain or loss on the investment
Restricted CashCash and cash equivalents that are restricted as to withdrawal or use under the terms of certain contractual agreements are recorded in Other assets on our balance 32 sheet
Our Automotive sector restricted cash balances primarily include various escrow agreements related to legal, insurance, customs, and environmental matters
Our Financial Services sector restricted cash balances primarily include cash held to meet certain local governmental and regulatory 32 reserve requirements and cash held under the terms of certain contractual agreements
Restricted cash does not include required minimum balances or cash securing debt issued through securitization transactions
Trade ReceivablesTrade receivables, recorded on our consolidated balance sheet in Other receivables, 32 net, consist primarily of Automotive sector receivables for vehicles, parts, and accessories
Trade receivables initially are recorded at the transaction amount
We record an allowance for doubtful accounts representing our estimate of the probable losses
Each reporting period, we evaluate the collectability of the receivables
Additions to the allowance for doubtful accounts are made by recording charges to bad debt expense reported in Automotive cost of sales
Net Intangible Assets We capitalize and amortize our finite lived intangible assets over their estimated useful lives
Indefinite lived intangible assets are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate the assets may be impaired
Our intangible assets are comprised primarily of license and advertising agreements, land rights, patents, customer contracts, and technology
Our indefinite lived intangibles were tested for impairment in 2015 32 and no impairment was required
The net carrying amount of our intangible assets was 124  million 32 and 133  million 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively, and are reported in Other assets on our balance sheet
Amortization was, and is expected to be, less than 17  million 32 a year through 2020
FS 13FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  2
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 32 Continued Long Lived Asset ImpairmentWe test long lived asset groups for recoverability at the operating segment level when changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable
Events that trigger a test for recoverability include material adverse changes in projected revenues and expenses, significant underperformance relative to historical and projected future operating results, significant negative industry or economic trends, and a significant adverse change in the manner in which an asset group is used or in its physical condition
When a triggering event occurs, a test for recoverability is performed, comparing projected undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying value of the asset group
If the test for recoverability identifies a possible impairment, the asset group 8217 s fair value is measured relying primarily on a discounted cash flow method
An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of the asset group exceeds its estimated fair value
When an impairment loss is recognized for assets to be held and used, the adjusted carrying amount of those assets is depreciated over their remaining useful life
No impairment of long lived assets was recorded in 2015
Revenue Recognition 8212 Automotive SectorAutomotive revenue is generated primarily by sales of vehicles, parts, and accessories
Revenue is recorded when all risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to our customers generally dealers and distributors
For the majority of our sales, this occurs when products are shipped from our manufacturing facilities
When we give our dealers the right to return eligible parts for credit, we reduce the related revenue for expected returns
We sell vehicles to fleet customers, primarily daily rental car companies, subject to guaranteed repurchase options
These vehicles are accounted for as operating leases
At the time of sale, the proceeds are recorded as deferred revenue in Other liabilities and deferred revenue
The difference between the proceeds and the guaranteed repurchase amount is recognized in Automotive revenues 32 over the term of the lease using a straight line method
The cost of the vehicle is recorded in Net investment in operating leases 32 and the difference between the cost of the vehicle and the estimated auction value is depreciated in Automotive cost of sales 32 over the term of the lease
32 32 Proceeds from the sale of the vehicle at auction are recognized in Automotive revenues at the time of sale
On average, leases now remain outstanding for approximately one year accordingly, we have reclassified Net investment in operating leases 32 from current assets to non current assets
We have reclassified our prior year sector statements to conform to current year presentation
Revenue Recognition 8212 Financial Services SectorFinancial Services revenue is generated primarily from interest on finance receivables including direct financing leases
Interest is recognized using the interest method, and includes the amortization of certain direct origination costs
Revenue from payments received on operating leases is recognized on a straight line basis over the term of the lease
Revenue from interest on finance receivables and operating leases is discontinued at the time a receivable or account is determined to be uncollectible
Finance and Lease IncentivesWe offer special financing and lease incentives to customers who choose to finance or lease Ford or Lincoln brand vehicles from Ford Credit
The estimated cost for these incentives is recorded as a reduction to Automotive revenues 32 when the vehicle is sold to the dealer
Ford Credit records a reduction to the finance receivable or reduces the cost of the vehicle operating lease when it records the underlying finance contract and we transfer to it the amount of the incentive on behalf of the dealer 8217 s customer
See Note 1 32 for additional information regarding transactions between Automotive and Financial Services sectors
The Financial Services sector recognized interest revenue of 1
5  billion 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively, and lower depreciation of 1
3  billion, and 946  million 32 in 2015, 2014 32 and 2013, respectively associated with these incentives
FS 14FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  2
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 32 Continued Sales and Marketing IncentivesSales and marketing incentives generally are recognized by the Automotive sector as revenue reductions in Automotive revenues
The incentives generally take the form of cash payments to dealers and dealers 8217 customers
The reduction to revenue is accrued at the later of the date the related vehicle is sold or the date the incentive program is both approved and communicated
We generally estimate these accruals using incentive programs that are approved as of the balance sheet date and are expected to be effective at the beginning of the subsequent period
Supplier Price Adjustments  We frequently negotiate price adjustments with our suppliers throughout a production cycle, even after receiving production material
These price adjustments relate to changes in design specifications or other commercial terms such as economics, productivity, and competitive pricing
We recognize price adjustments when we reach final agreement with our suppliers
In general, we avoid direct price changes in consideration of future business however, when these occur, our policy is to defer the financial statement impact of any such price change given explicitly in consideration of future business where guaranteed volumes are specified
Raw Material ArrangementsWe may, at times, negotiate prices for and facilitate the purchase of raw materials on behalf of our suppliers
These raw material arrangements, which take place independently of any purchase orders issued to our suppliers, are negotiated at arms 8217 length and do not involve volume guarantees
When we pass the risks and rewards of ownership to our suppliers, including inventory risk, market price risk, and credit risk for the raw material, we record both the cost of the raw material and the income from the subsequent sale to the supplier in Automotive cost of sales
governmental entities in the form of tax rebates or credits, grants, and loans
Government incentives are recorded in the financial statements in accordance with their purpose, either as a reduction of expense, a reduction of the cost of the capital investment, or other income
The benefit is recorded when all conditions attached to the incentive have been met and there is reasonable assurance of receipt
Employee Bonus and Lump sum PaymentsPerformance based and inflation protection employee bonuses are accrued throughout the period in which services are provided and the bonus is earned
Lump sum cash bonuses paid in connection with signing a union contract are recognized entirely in the period that the contract negotiations are finalized and ratified
Effective November 23, 2015, we signed a new agreement with the International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace, and Agricultural Implement Workers of America 8220 UAW 8221 covering approximately 53,000 32 employees in the United States
The agreement established wages, benefits, and a variety of bonus payments for covered employees over a four year period
The agreement also provided for a lump sum ratification bonus of 8,500 32 per employee which we have reported in Automotive cost of sales
Selected Other CostsEngineering, research, and development expenses, primarily salaries, materials, and associated costs, are reported in Automotive cost of sales advertising costs are reported in Selling, administrative, and other expenses
Engineering, research, and development costs are expensed as incurred when performed internally or when performed by a supplier if we guarantee reimbursement
Engineering, research, development, and advertising expenses for the years ended December  31 32 were as follows in billions  2015  2014  2013Engineering, research, and development 6
4FS 15FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  2
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 32 Continued Presentation of Sales and Sales Related TaxesWe collect and remit taxes assessed by different governmental authorities that are both imposed on and concurrent with a revenue producing transaction between us and our customers
These taxes may include, but are not limited to, sales, use, value added, and some excise taxes
We report the collection of these taxes on a net basis excluded from revenues
32 In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board 8220 FASB 8221 issued a new accounting standard that requires recognition of revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services
GAAP guidance on revenue recognition and requires the use of more estimates and judgments than the present standards, as well as additional disclosures
The FASB issued ASU 2015 14 to defer the original effective date from January  1,  2017 to January  1,  2018, while allowing for early adoption as of January  1,  2017
The new accounting standard is expected to have an impact to our income statement, balance sheet, and financial statement disclosures and we are reviewing our arrangements to evaluate the impact and method of adoption
FS 16FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  4
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 32 Cash equivalents, marketable securities, and derivative financial instruments are remeasured and presented on our financial statements on a recurring basis at fair value, while other assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis
Fair Value MeasurementsIn measuring fair value, we use various valuation methods and prioritize the use of observable inputs
The use of observable and unobservable inputs and their significance in measuring fair value are reflected in our fair value hierarchy
Included in Cash and cash equivalents 32 are highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value due to interest rate, quoted price, or penalty on withdrawal
A debt security is classified as a cash equivalent if it meets these criteria and if it has a remaining time to maturity of three months or less from the date of acquisition
Amounts on deposit and available upon demand, or negotiated to provide for daily liquidity without penalty, are classified as Cash and cash equivalents
Time deposits, certificates of deposit, and money market accounts that meet the above criteria are reported at par value on our balance sheet and are excluded from the tables below
Investments in securities with a maturity date greater than three months at the date of purchase 32 and other securities for which there is more than an insignificant risk of change in value due to interest rate, quoted price, or penalty on withdrawal are classified as Marketable securities
We generally measure fair value using prices obtained from pricing services
Pricing methods and inputs to valuation models used by the pricing services depend on the security type i
Where possible, fair values are generated using market inputs including quoted prices the closing price in an exchange market , bid prices the price at which a buyer stands ready to purchase , and other market information
For fixed income securities that are not actively traded, the pricing services use alternative methods to determine fair value for the securities, including quotes for similar fixed income securities, matrix pricing, discounted cash flow using benchmark curves, or other factors
In certain cases, when market data are not available, we may use broker quotes to determine fair value
An annual review is performed on the security prices received from our pricing services, which includes discussion and analysis of the inputs used by the pricing services to value our securities
We also compare the price of certain securities sold close to the quarter end to the price of the same security at the balance sheet date to ensure the reported fair value is reasonable
Realized gains and losses and interest income on all of our marketable securities, and unrealized gains and losses on securities not classified as available for sale 8220 AFS 8221 , are recorded in Automotive interest income and other income expense , net and 32 Financial Services other income loss , net
Unrealized gains and losses on AFS securities are recognized in Unrealized gains and losses on securities, a component of Other comprehensive income loss
Realized gains and losses and reclassifications of accumulated other comprehensive income into net income are measured using the specific identification method
FS 17FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  4
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 32 Continued Included in non U
government and agencies marketable securities at December 31, 2015 are AFS securities with an aggregate fair value of 70 million, an amortized cost basis of 82 million, and unrealized losses 32 of 12  million
All of these securities have a maturity date between one 32 and five years 32 as of the balance sheet date
During 2015, proceeds and realized gains losses from the sale of AFS securities were 1 million 32 and 0, respectively
We regularly evaluate whether unrealized losses on AFS securities are temporary in nature
If losses are determined to be other than temporary and we do not expect to recover the carrying amount of the security, we reclassify unrecognized losses into income
We have determined that none of our AFS securities are impaired at December 31, 2015
We did not have any AFS securities at December 31, 2014
Our derivatives are over the counter customized derivative transactions and are not exchange traded
We estimate the fair value of these instruments using industry standard valuation models such as a discounted cash flow
These models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market based expectations for interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, and the contractual terms of the derivative instruments
The discount rate used is the relevant interbank deposit rate e
, LIBOR plus an adjustment for non performance risk
The adjustment reflects the full credit default swap 8220 CDS 8221 spread applied to a net exposure, by counterparty, considering the master netting agreements and any posted collateral
We use our counterparty 8217 s CDS spread when we are in a net asset position and our own CDS spread when we are in a net liability position
In certain cases, market data is not available and we use broker quotes and models e
This includes situations where there is lack of liquidity for a particular currency or commodity, or when the instrument is longer dated
We measure finance receivables at fair value for purposes of disclosure see Note  5 using internal valuation models
These models project future cash flows of financing contracts based on scheduled contract payments including principal and interest
The projected cash flows are discounted to present value based on assumptions regarding credit losses, pre payment speed, and applicable spreads to approximate current rates
Our assumptions regarding pre payment speed and credit losses are based on historical performance
The fair value of finance receivables is categorized within Level 3 of the hierarchy
On a nonrecurring basis, we also measure at fair value retail contracts greater than 120 days past due or deemed to be uncollectible, and individual dealer loans probable of foreclosure
We use the fair value of collateral, adjusted for estimated costs to sell, to determine the fair value of our receivables
The collateral for a retail receivable is the vehicle financed, and for dealer loans is real estate or other property
The fair value of collateral for retail receivables is calculated by multiplying the outstanding receivable balances by the average recovery value percentage
The fair value of collateral for dealer loans is determined by reviewing various appraisals, which include total adjusted appraised value of land and improvements, alternate use appraised value, broker 8217 s opinion of value, and purchase offers
We measure debt at fair value for purposes of disclosure see Note  13 using quoted prices for our own debt with approximately the same remaining maturities
Where quoted prices are not available, we estimate fair value using discounted cash flows and market based expectations for interest rates, credit risk, and the contractual terms of the debt instruments
For certain short term debt with an original maturity date of one year or less, we assume that book value is a reasonable approximation of the debt 8217 s fair value
The fair value of debt is categorized within Level  2 of the hierarchy
FS 18FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  4
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 32 Continued Input Hierarchy of Items Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring BasisThe following tables categorize the fair values of items measured at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31 on our balance sheet in millions  2015  2014  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Total  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  TotalAutomotive Sector                Assets                Cash equivalents 8211 financial instruments                U
government and agencies 115  22  8212  137  8212  64  8212  64Non U
government and agencies 8212  173  8212  173  8212  122  8212  122Corporate debt 8212  20  8212  20  8212  20  8212  20Total cash equivalents a 115  215  8212  330  8212  206  8212  206Marketable securities                U
government and agencies1,623  5,240  8212  6,863  969  5,789  8212  6,758Non U
government and agencies 8212  266  8212  266  8212  341  8212  341Corporate debt 8212  8212  8212  8212  8212  10  8212  10Total cash equivalents a 8212  266  8212  266  8212  351  8212  351Marketable securities                U
government and agencies298  1,169  8212  1,467  17  1,251  8212  1,268Non U
8  billion 32 for Financial Services sector at December  31, 2015 32 and  2014, respectively
In addition to these cash equivalents, we also had cash on hand totaling 1
3  billion 32 and 2  billion 32 for Financial Services sector at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively
b See Note  16 32 for additional information regarding derivative financial instruments
FS 19FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  5
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR FINANCE RECEIVABLES 32 Our Financial Services sector, primarily Ford Credit, manages finance receivables as 8220 consumer 8221 and 8220 non consumer 8221 portfolios
The receivables are generally secured by the vehicles, inventory, or other property being financed
Finance receivables are recorded at time of origination or purchase at fair value and are subsequently reported at amortized cost, net of any allowance for credit losses
Receivables in this portfolio include products offered to individuals and businesses that finance the acquisition of Ford and Lincoln vehicles from dealers for personal or commercial use
Retail financing includes retail installment contracts for new and used vehicles and direct financing leases with retail customers, government entities, daily rental companies, and fleet customers
32 32 Receivables in this portfolio include products offered to automotive dealers
The products include 8226 Dealer financing 32 8211 includes wholesale loans to dealers to finance the purchase of vehicle inventory, also known as floorplan financing, as well as loans to dealers to finance working capital and improvements to dealership facilities, finance the purchase of dealership real estate, and finance other dealer programs
4  billion 32 and 5  billion, respectively, are reclassified to Other receivables, net, resulting in Finance receivables, net 32 of 90
b At December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, Finance receivables, net includes 1
7 billion, respectively, of net investment in direct financing leases
7 billion, respectively, of certain receivables primarily direct financing leases that are not subject to fair value disclosure requirements
Excluded from finance receivables at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, was 209 million 32 and 191  million, respectively, of accrued uncollected interest, which we report in Other assets 32 on the balance sheet
FS 20FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  5
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR FINANCE RECEIVABLES 32 Continued Included in the recorded investment in finance receivables at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014 32 were consumer receivables of 27
4 billion, respectively, and non consumer receivables of 26
8  billion, respectively, that have been sold for legal purposes in securitization transactions but continue to be reported in our consolidated financial statements
The receivables are available only for payment of the debt issued by, and other obligations of, the securitization entities that are parties to those securitization transactions they are not available to pay the other obligations or the claims of Ford Credit 8217 s other creditors
Ford Credit holds the right to receive the excess cash flows not needed to pay the debt issued by, and other obligations of, the securitization entities that are parties to those securitization transactions see Note 15
Our finance receivables are generally pre payable without penalty, so prepayments may cause actual maturities to differ from contractual maturities
The above table, therefore, is not to be regarded as a forecast of future cash collections
For wholesale receivables, which are included in dealer financing, maturities stated above are estimated based on historical trends, as maturities on outstanding amounts are scheduled upon the sale of the underlying vehicle by the dealer
Aging 32 For all finance receivables, we define 8220 past due 8221 as any payment, including principal and interest, that is at least 31  days past the contractual due date
The recorded investment of consumer receivables greater than 90 days past due and still accruing interest was 16  million 32 and 17  million 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively
The recorded investment of non consumer receivables greater than 90 days past due and still accruing interest was 1 million 32 and 3  million 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR FINANCE RECEIVABLES 32 Continued Credit QualityConsumer Portfolio
When originating all classes of consumer receivables, we use a proprietary scoring system that measures the credit quality of the receivables using several factors, such as credit bureau information, consumer credit risk scores e
In addition to our proprietary scoring system, we consider other individual consumer factors, such as employment history, financial stability, and capacity to pay
Subsequent to origination, we review the credit quality of retail financing based on customer payment activity
As each customer develops a payment history, we use an internally developed behavioral scoring model to assist in determining the best collection strategies which allows us to focus collection activity on higher risk accounts
These models are used to refine our risk based staffing model to ensure collection resources are aligned with portfolio risk
Based on data from this scoring model, contracts are categorized by collection risk
Our collection models evaluate several factors, including origination characteristics, updated credit bureau data, and payment patterns
Credit quality ratings for consumer receivables are based on aging
Consumer receivables credit quality ratings are as follows 8226 Pass 32 8211 current to 60 days past due 32 8226 Special Mention 32 8211 61 to 120 days past due and in intensified collection status 8226 Substandard 32 8211 greater than 120 days past due 32 and for which the uncollectible portion of the receivables has already been charged off, as measured using the fair value of collateral less costs to sellNon Consumer Portfolio
We extend credit to dealers primarily in the form of lines of credit to purchase new Ford and Lincoln vehicles as well as used vehicles
Payment is required when the dealer has sold the vehicle
Each non consumer lending request is evaluated by taking into consideration the borrower 8217 s financial condition and the underlying collateral securing the loan
We use a proprietary model to assign each dealer a risk rating
This model uses historical dealer performance data to identify key factors about a dealer that we consider most significant in predicting a dealer 8217 s ability to meet its financial obligations
We also consider numerous other financial and qualitative factors of the dealer 8217 s operations including capitalization and leverage, liquidity and cash flow, profitability, and credit history with ourselves and other creditors
Dealers are assigned to one of four groups according to risk ratings as follows 8226 Group I 32 8211 strong to superior financial metrics 8226 Group II 32 8211 fair to favorable financial metrics 8226 Group III 32 8211 marginal to weak financial metrics 8226 Group IV 32 8211 poor financial metrics, including dealers classified as uncollectibleWe generally suspend credit lines and extend no further funding to dealers classified in Group IV
We regularly review our model to confirm the continued business significance and statistical predictability of the factors and update the model to incorporate new factors or other information that improves its statistical predictability
In addition, we regularly audit dealer inventory and dealer sales records to verify that the dealer is in possession of the financed vehicles and is promptly paying each receivable following the sale of the financed vehicle
The frequency of on site vehicle inventory audits depends on factors such as the dealer 8217 s risk rating and our security position
Under our policies, on site vehicle inventory audits of low risk dealers are conducted only as circumstances warrant
Audits of higher risk dealers are conducted with increased frequency based on risk ratings and our security position
We perform a credit review of each dealer at least annually and adjust the dealer 8217 s risk rating, if necessary
The credit quality of dealer financing receivables is evaluated based on our internal dealer risk rating analysis
A dealer has the same risk rating for its entire dealer financing regardless of the type of financing
FS 22FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  5
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR FINANCE RECEIVABLES 32 Continued The credit quality analysis of our dealer financing receivables at December  31 32 was as follows in millions  2015  2014Dealer Financing    Group I 26,560  23,125Group II7,175  6,350Group III1,683  1,783Group IV111  82Total recorded investment 35,529  31,340Impaired Receivables
32 32 Impaired consumer receivables include accounts that have been rewritten or modified in reorganization proceedings pursuant to the U
Bankruptcy Code that are considered to be troubled debt restructurings 8220 TDRs 8221 , as well as all accounts greater than 120 days past due
Impaired non consumer receivables represent accounts with dealers that have weak or poor financial metrics or dealer financing that has been modified in TDRs
The recorded investment of consumer receivables that were impaired at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014 32 was 375  million, or 0
6  of consumer receivables, and 415  million, or 0
The recorded investment of non consumer receivables that were impaired at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014 32 was 134  million, or 0
4 32 of non consumer receivables, and 105  million, or 0
3 32 of the non consumer receivables, respectively
Impaired finance receivables are evaluated both collectively and specifically
The accrual of revenue is discontinued at the time a receivable is determined to be uncollectible
Accounts may be restored to accrual status only when a customer settles all past due deficiency balances and future payments are reasonably assured
For receivables in non accrual status, subsequent financing revenue is recognized only to the extent a payment is received
Payments are generally applied first to outstanding interest and then to the unpaid principal balance
A restructuring of debt constitutes a TDR if we grant a concession to a debtor for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor 8217 s financial difficulties that we otherwise would not consider
Consumer and non consumer receivables that have a modified interest rate below market rate or that were modified in reorganization proceedings pursuant to the U
Bankruptcy Code, except non consumer receivables that are current with minimal risk of loss, are considered to be TDRs
We do not grant concessions on the principal balance of our receivables
If a receivable is modified in a reorganization proceeding, all payment requirements of the reorganization plan need to be met before remaining balances are forgiven
Finance receivables involved in TDRs are specifically assessed for impairment
FS 23FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  6
NET INVESTMENT IN OPERATING LEASES 32 Net investment in operating leases 32 on our balance sheet consists primarily of lease contracts for vehicles with retail customers, daily rental companies, government entities, and fleet customers
Assets subject to operating leases are depreciated using the straight line method over the term of the lease to reduce the asset to its estimated residual value
Estimated residual values are based on assumptions for used vehicle prices at lease termination and the number of vehicles that are expected to be returned
The net investment in operating leases at December 31 was as follows in millions  2015  2014Automotive Sector    Vehicles, net of depreciation 2,014  1,699Financial Services Sector    Vehicles and other equipment, at cost a 29,673  24,952Accumulated depreciation 4,545  3,396 Allowance for credit losses 49  38 Total Financial Services sector25,079  21,518Total Company 27,093  23,217 a Includes Ford Credit 8217 s operating lease assets of 13
6  billion 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively, for which the related cash flows have been used to secure certain lease securitization transactions
Cash flows associated with the net investment in operating leases are available only for payment of the debt or other obligations issued or arising in the securitization transactions they are not available to pay other obligations or the claims of other creditors
Financial Services SectorIncluded in Financial Services revenues 32 are rents on operating leases
The amounts contractually due for minimum rentals on operating leases at December  31, 2015 32 were as follows in millions  2016  2017  2018  2019  Thereafter  TotalMinimum rentals on operating leases 4,021  2,504  919  59  3  7,506FS 24FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  7
32 32 FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES 32 The allowance for credit losses represents our estimate of the probable credit loss inherent in finance receivables as of the balance sheet date
The adequacy of the allowance for credit losses is assessed quarterly and the assumptions and models used in establishing the allowance are evaluated regularly
Because credit losses may vary substantially over time, estimating credit losses requires a number of assumptions about matters that are uncertain
The majority of credit losses are attributable to Ford Credit 8217 s consumer receivables portfolio
Additions to the allowance for credit losses are made by recording charges to Provision for credit and insurance losses 32 on the sector income statement
The uncollectible portion of finance receivables are charged to the allowance for credit losses at the earlier of when an account is deemed to be uncollectible or when an account is 120  days delinquent, taking into consideration the financial condition of the customer, borrower, or lessee, the value of the collateral, recourse to guarantors, and other factors
In the event we repossess the collateral, the receivable is charged off and we record the collateral at its estimated fair value less costs to sell and report it in Other assets 32 on the balance sheet
Charge offs on finance receivables include uncollected amounts related to principal, interest, late fees, and other allowable charges
Recoveries on finance receivables previously charged off as uncollectible, are credited to the allowance for credit losses
Consumer We estimate the allowance for credit losses on our consumer receivables using a combination of measurement models and management judgment
The models consider factors such as historical trends in credit losses and recoveries including key metrics such as delinquencies, repossessions, and bankruptcies , the composition of the present portfolio including vehicle brand, term, risk evaluation, and new used vehicles , trends in historical used vehicle values, and economic conditions
Estimates from these models rely on historical information and may not fully reflect losses inherent in the present portfolio
Therefore, we may adjust the estimate to reflect management judgment regarding observable changes in recent economic trends and conditions, portfolio composition, and other relevant factors
32 32 The collective allowance is evaluated primarily using a collective loss 8209 to 8209 receivables 8220 LTR 8221 model that, based on historical experience, indicates credit losses have been incurred in the portfolio even though the particular accounts that are uncollectible cannot be specifically identified
The LTR model is based on the most recent years of history
Each LTR is calculated by dividing credit losses by average finance receivables excluding unearned interest supplements and allowance for credit losses
An average LTR is calculated for each product and multiplied by the end of period balances for that given product
FS 25FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  7
32 32 FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES 32 Continued Our largest markets also use a loss projection model to estimate losses inherent in the portfolio
The loss projection model applies recent monthly performance metrics, stratified by contract type retail or lease , contract term e
,  60 8209 month , and risk rating to our active portfolio to estimate the losses that have been incurred
The loss emergence period 8220 LEP 8221 is a key assumption within our models and represents the average amount of time between when a loss event first occurs and when it is charged off
This time period starts when the consumer begins to experience financial difficulty
It is evidenced, typically through delinquency, before eventually resulting in a charge off
The LEP is a multiplier in the calculation of the collective consumer allowance for credit losses
For accounts greater than 120 days past due, the uncollectible portion is charged off such that the remaining recorded investment is equal to the estimated fair value of the collateral less costs to sell
Consumer receivables involved in TDRs are specifically assessed for impairment
A specific allowance is estimated based on the present value of the expected future cash flows of the receivable discounted at the contract 8217 s original effective interest rate or the fair value of any collateral adjusted for estimated costs to sell
After establishing the collective and specific allowance for credit losses, if management believes the allowance does not reflect all losses inherent in the portfolio due to changes in recent economic trends and conditions, or other relevant factors, an adjustment is made based on management judgment
Non Consumer We estimate the allowance for credit losses for non consumer receivables based on historical LTR ratios, expected future cash flows, and the fair value of collateral
We estimate an allowance for non consumer receivables that are not specifically identified as impaired using a LTR model for each financing product based on historical experience
This LTR is an average of the most recent historical experience and is calculated consistent with the consumer receivables LTR approach
All accounts that are specifically identified as impaired are excluded from the calculation of the non specific or collective allowance
Dealer financing is evaluated by segmenting individual loans by the risk characteristics of the loan such as the amount of the loan, the nature of the collateral, and the financial status of the debtor
The loans are analyzed to determine whether individual loans are impaired, and a specific allowance is estimated based on the present value of the expected future cash flows of the receivable discounted at the loan 8217 s original effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral adjusted for estimated costs to sell
After establishing the collective and the specific allowance for credit losses, if management believes the allowance does not reflect all losses inherent in the portfolio due to changes in recent economic trends and conditions, or other relevant factors, an adjustment is made based on management judgment
FS 26FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  7
b Total allowance, including reserves for operating leases, was 422 million
b Total allowance, including reserves for operating leases, was 359 million
FS 27FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  8
INVENTORIES 32 All inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value
inventories is determined on a last in, first out 8220 LIFO 8221 basis
LIFO was used for 27 32 and 28 32 of total inventories at December  31,  2015 32 and 2014, respectively
Cost of other inventories is determined by costing methods that approximate  a first in, first out 8220 FIFO 8221 basis
Inventories at December 31 were as follows in millions  2015  2014Raw materials, work in process, and supplies 4,005  3,859Finished products5,254  5,026Total inventories under FIFO9,259  8,885LIFO adjustment 940  1,015 Total inventories 8,319  7,870NOTE  9
EQUITY IN NET ASSETS OF AFFILIATED COMPANIES 32 We use the equity method of accounting for our investments in entities over which we do not have control, but over whose operating and financial policies we are able to exercise significant influence
Our ownership percentages and carrying value of our equity method investments at December 31 were as follows in millions, except percentages   Ownership Percentage  Investment BalanceAutomotive Sector  2015  2015  2014Changan Ford Automobile Corporation, Limited  50
0  1,307  1,301Jiangling Motors Corporation, Limited  32
0  429  428Ford Otomotiv Sanayi Anonim Sirketi  41
0  9  8Automotive Fuel Cell Cooperation Corporation  49
0  4  3Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership LLC  50
3  8212  8212 Total Automotive sector    3,091  3,216Financial Services Sector       Forso Nordic AB  50
0  15  20CNF Administradora de Consorcio Nacional Ltda
3  4  4Total Financial Services sector    133  141Total Company    3,224  3,357FS 28FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  9
EQUITY IN NET ASSETS OF AFFILIATED COMPANIES 32 Continued We received 1
5  billion, and 529  million 32 of dividends from these affiliated companies for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014,  and  2013, respectively
Transactions with equity method investees reported on our consolidated income statement and balance sheet at December 31 were as follows in millions  For the years ended December 31,Income Statement2015  2014  2013Sales 4,426  5,208  6,421Purchases 7,780  9,430  10,536Royalty income610  500  526Balance Sheet2015  2014Receivables 870  1,056Payables671  712FS 29FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  10
NET PROPERTY AND LEASE COMMITMENTS 32 Net PropertyNet property is reported at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and impairments
We capitalize new assets when we expect to use the asset for more than one year
Routine maintenance and repair costs are expensed when incurred
Property and equipment are depreciated primarily using the straight line method over the estimated useful life of the asset
5 32 years for machinery and equipment, 8 32 years for software, 30 32 years for land improvements, and 36  years for buildings
Tooling generally is amortized over the expected life of a product program using a straight line method
Automotive sector property related expenses for the years ended December  31 were as follows in millions  2015  2014  2013Depreciation and other amortization 2,028  2,092  2,110Tooling amortization 2,304  2,  1,954Total 4,332  4,252  4,064       Maintenance and rearrangement 1,651  1,523  1,422Conditional Asset Retirement ObligationsConditional asset retirement obligations relate to legal obligations associated with the retirement, abandonment, or disposal of tangible long lived assets
Estimates of the fair value liabilities for our conditional asset retirement obligations that are recorded in Other liabilities and deferred revenue 32 at December 31 were as follows in millions  2015  2014Beginning balance 228  246Liabilities settled 6  11 Revisions to estimates 6  7 Ending balance 216  228FS 30FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  10
NET PROPERTY AND LEASE COMMITMENTS 32 Continued Lease CommitmentsWe lease land, buildings, and equipment under agreements that expire over various contractual periods
Minimum non cancellable operating lease commitments at December  31, 2015 32 were as follows in millions  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  Thereafter  TotalAutomotive sector 270  220  152  105  74  73  894Financial Services sector8  5  4  2  2  7  28Total Company 278  225  156  107  76  80  922Operating lease expense for the years ended December 31 was as follows in millions  2015  2014  2013Automotive sector 433  423  411Financial Services sector27  101  105Total Company 460  524  516NOTE  11
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Defined benefit pension and OPEB plan obligations are remeasured annually as of December 31 based on the present value of projected future benefit payments for all participants for services rendered to date
The measurement of projected future benefits is dependent on the provisions of each specific plan, demographics of the group covered by the plan, and other key measurement assumptions
For plans that provide benefits dependent on salary assumptions, we include a projection of salary growth in our measurements
No assumption is made regarding any potential changes to benefit provisions beyond those to which we are presently committed e
Net periodic benefit costs, including service cost, interest cost, and expected return on assets are determined using assumptions regarding the benefit obligation and the fair value of plan assets where applicable as of the beginning of each year
We have elected to use a fair value of plan assets to calculate the expected return on assets in net periodic benefit cost
The funded status of the benefit plans, which represents the difference between the benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets, is calculated on a plan by plan basis
The benefit obligation and related funded status are determined using assumptions as of the end of each year
Actuarial gains and losses resulting from plan remeasurement are recognized in net periodic benefit cost in the period of the remeasurement
The impact of plan amendments is recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss , 32 and is amortized as a component of net periodic cost generally over the remaining service period of the active employees
Net periodic benefit costs are recorded in Automotive cost of sales 32 and Selling, administrative, and other expenses
Curtailment gains or losses are recorded when an event occurs that significantly reduces the expected years of future service or eliminates the accrual of defined benefits for the future services of a significant number of employees
We record a curtailment gain when the employees who are entitled to the benefits terminate their employment we record a curtailment loss when it becomes probable a loss will occur
We recognize settlement expense, when applicable, if the cost of all settlements during the year exceeds the interest component of net periodic cost for the affected plan
Expense from curtailments and settlements is recorded in Automotive cost of sales 32 and Selling, administrative, and other expenses
32 We have defined benefit pension plans in the United States, Canada, United  Kingdom, Germany and other locations covering hourly and salaried employees
The largest portion of our worldwide obligation is associated with our U
The vast majority of our worldwide defined benefit plans are closed to new participants
In general, our defined benefit pension plans are funded i
, have restricted assets from which benefits are paid
Our unfunded defined benefit pension plans are treated on a 8220 pay as you go 8221 basis with benefit payments from general Company cash
These unfunded plans primarily include certain plans in Germany and the U
We have defined benefit OPEB plans, primarily certain health care and life insurance benefits, in the United  States, Canada, and other locations covering hourly and salaried employees
The largest portion of our worldwide obligation is associated with our U
Our OPEB plans are unfunded and the benefits are paid from general Company cash
We also have defined contribution and savings plans in the United States and other locations for hourly and salaried employees
Contributions to these plans, if any, are made from general Company cash and are expensed as incurred
The expense for our worldwide defined contribution and savings plans was 291  million, 275  million, and 237  million 32 for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
This includes the expense for Company matching contributions to our primary employee savings plan in the United States of 124  million, 114  million, and 99  million 32 for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
FS 32FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued Defined Benefit Plans 8211 Expense and StatusThe assumptions used to determine expense and benefit obligation were as follows  Pension Benefits      U
OPEB  2015  2014  2015  2014  2015  2014Weighted Average Assumptions at December 31            Discount rate4
11  8212  8212 Average rate of increase in compensation3
80Assumptions Used to Determine Net Benefit Cost for the Year Ended December 31            Discount rate3
63  8212  8212 Average rate of increase in compensation3
80The pre tax expense for our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans for the years ended December  31 was as follows in millions  Pension Benefits        U
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued The year end status of these plans was as follows in millions   Pension Benefits       U
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued Separation Programs As a result of various business restructuring programs, primarily in Europe and Australia, we have recognized pension related separation expense in the periods presented
Pension Plan ContributionsOur policy for funded pension plans is to contribute annually, at a minimum, amounts required by applicable laws and regulations
We may make contributions beyond those legally required
1 billion 32 to our worldwide funded pension plans most of which were mandatory contributions and made about 400 million 32 of benefit payments to participants in unfunded plans
5 billion 32 from Automotive cash and cash equivalents to our worldwide funded pension plans including discretionary contributions of about 400 million and to make about 300  million 32 of benefit payments to participants in unfunded plans, for a total of about 1
Based on current assumptions and regulations, we do not expect to have a legal requirement to contribute to our major U
Estimated Future Benefit Payments and AmortizationThe estimated future gross benefit payments were as follows in millions   Gross Benefit Payments   Pension     U
Plans  WorldwideOPEB2016  3,050  1,340  3502017  3,000  1,180  3502018  2,980  1,190  3502019  2,950  1,220  3402020  2,940  1,250  3402021 2025  14,600  6,660  1,700The prior service cost credit amounts in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 that are expected to be recognized as components of net periodic benefit cost income during 2016 32 are 170 million 32 for U
pension plans, and 140  million 32 for Worldwide OPEB plans
Pension Plan Asset InformationInvestment Objective and Strategies
plans are to minimize the volatility of the value of our U
pension obligations and to ensure assets are sufficient to pay plan benefits
In 2012, we adopted a broad global pension de risking strategy, including a U
investment strategy that increases the matching characteristics of our assets relative to our obligations
target asset allocations are 80 32 fixed income and 20 32 growth assets primarily alternative investments which include hedge funds, real estate, and private equity, and public equity
At year end 2015, actual allocations were 77 32 fixed income and 23 32 growth assets
plans United Kingdom and Canada have similar investment objectives to the U
plans and have made progress towards these objectives
plans reflect a balance of risk reducing and return seeking considerations
The objective of minimizing the volatility of assets relative to obligations is addressed primarily through asset 8211 liability matching, asset diversification, and hedging
The fixed income target asset allocation matches the bond like and long dated nature of the pension obligations
Assets are broadly diversified within asset classes to achieve risk adjusted returns that in total lower asset volatility relative to the obligations
Our rebalancing policies ensure actual allocations are in line with target allocations as appropriate
Strategies to address the goal of ensuring sufficient assets to pay benefits include target allocations to a broad array of asset classes, and strategies within asset classes that provide adequate returns, diversification, and liquidity
FS 35FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued All assets are externally managed and most assets are actively managed
Managers are not permitted to invest outside of the asset class e
, fixed income, public equity, alternatives or strategy for which they have been appointed
We use investment guidelines and recurring audits as tools to ensure investment managers invest solely within the investment strategy they have been provided
Derivatives are permitted for fixed income investment and public equity managers to use as efficient substitutes for traditional securities and to manage exposure to interest rate and foreign exchange risks
Interest rate and foreign currency derivative instruments are used for the purpose of hedging changes in the fair value of assets that result from interest rate changes and currency fluctuations
Interest rate derivatives also are used to adjust portfolio duration
Derivatives may not be used to leverage or to alter the economic exposure to an asset class outside the scope of the mandate an investment manager has been given
Alternative investment managers are permitted to employ leverage including through the use of derivatives or other tools that may alter economic exposure
Significant concentrations of risk in our plan assets relate to interest rate, equity, and operating risk
In order to minimize asset volatility relative to the obligations, the majority of plan assets are allocated to fixed income investments which are exposed to interest rate risk
Rate increases generally will result in a decline in the value of fixed income assets, while reducing the present value of the obligations
Conversely, rate decreases generally will increase the value of fixed income assets, offsetting the related increase in the obligations
In order to ensure assets are sufficient to pay benefits, a portion of plan assets is allocated to growth assets that are expected over time to earn higher returns with more volatility than fixed income investments which more closely match pension obligations
Within equities, risk is mitigated by constructing a portfolio that is broadly diversified by geography, market capitalization, manager mandate size, investment style, and process
Within alternative investments, risk is similarly mitigated by constructing a portfolio that is broadly diversified by asset class, investment strategy, manager, style, and process
Operating risks include the risks of inadequate diversification and weak controls
To mitigate these risks, investments are diversified across and within asset classes in support of investment objectives
Policies and practices to address operating risks include ongoing manager oversight e
, style adherence, team strength, firm health, and internal risk controls , plan and asset class investment guidelines and instructions that are communicated to managers, and periodic compliance and audit reviews to ensure adherence
32 At year end 2015, Ford securities comprised less than 1 32 of our plan assets
The long term return assumption at year end 2015 32 is 6
A generally consistent approach is used worldwide to develop this assumption
This approach considers various sources, primarily inputs from a range of advisors for long term capital market returns, inflation, bond yields, and other variables, adjusted for specific aspects of our investment strategy by plan
Historical returns also are considered where appropriate
At December  31, 2015, our actual 10 year annual rate of return on pension plan assets was 8
At December  31, 2014, our actual 10 year annual rate of return on pension plan assets was 9
Pension assets are recorded at fair value, and include primarily fixed income and equity securities, derivatives, and alternative investments, which include hedge funds, private equity, and real estate
Fixed income and equity securities may each be combined into commingled fund investments
Most commingled funds are valued to reflect the pension fund 8217 s interest in the fund based on the reported year end net asset value 8220 NAV 8221
These funds are not classified in the fair value hierarchy
Alternative investments are valued based on year end reported NAV, with adjustments as appropriate for lagged reporting of 1 32 month to 6  months
FS 36FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued Fixed Income Government and Agency Debt Securities and Corporate Debt Securities
government and government agency obligations, non U
government and government agency obligations, municipal securities, supranational obligations, corporate bonds, bank notes, floating rate notes, and preferred securities are valued based on quotes received from independent pricing services or from dealers who make markets in such securities
Pricing services utilize matrix pricing, which considers readily available inputs such as the yield or price of bonds of comparable quality, coupon, maturity, and type, as well as dealer supplied prices, and generally are categorized as Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy
Securities categorized as Level 3 typically are priced by dealers and pricing services that use proprietary pricing models which incorporate unobservable inputs
These inputs primarily consist of yield and credit spread assumptions
Fixed Income Agency and Non Agency Mortgage and Other Asset Backed Securities
government agency mortgage and asset backed securities, non agency collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial mortgage securities, residential mortgage securities, and other asset backed securities are valued based on quotes received from independent pricing services or from dealers who make markets in such securities
Pricing services utilize matrix pricing, which considers prepayment speed assumptions, attributes of the collateral, yield or price of bonds of comparable quality, coupon, maturity and type, as well as dealer supplied prices, and generally are categorized as Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy
Securities categorized as Level 3 typically are priced by dealers and pricing services that use proprietary pricing models which incorporate unobservable inputs
These inputs primarily consist of prepayment curves, discount rates, default assumptions, and recovery rates
Equity securities are valued based on quoted prices and are primarily exchange traded
Securities for which official close or last trade pricing on an active exchange is available are classified as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy
If closing prices are not available, securities are valued at the last quoted bid price or may be valued using the last available price and typically are categorized as Level 2
Level 3 securities often are thinly traded or delisted, with unobservable pricing data
Exchange traded derivatives for which market quotations are readily available are valued at the last reported sale price or official closing price as reported by an independent pricing service on the primary market or exchange on which they are traded and are categorized as Level 1
Over the counter derivatives typically are valued by independent pricing services and categorized as Level 2
Level 3 derivatives typically are priced by dealers and pricing services that use proprietary pricing models which incorporate unobservable inputs, including extrapolated or model 8209 derived assumptions such as volatilities and yield and credit spread assumptions
Hedge funds generally hold liquid and readily priced securities, such as public equities, exchange traded derivatives, and corporate bonds
Since hedge funds do not have readily available market quotations, they are valued using the NAV provided by the investment sponsor or third party administrator
Hedge funds that are measured at fair value using the NAV per share or its equivalent practical expedient have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy
For 2015 32 and 2014, we made adjustments of 82  million 32 and 14 million, respectively, to adjust for hedge fund lagged valuations
Private equity and real estate investments are less liquid
External investment managers typically report valuations reflecting initial cost or updated appraisals, which are adjusted for cash flows, and realized and unrealized gains losses
Private equity and real estate funds do not have readily available market quotations, and therefore are valued using the NAV provided by the investment sponsor or third party administrator
Assets that are measured at NAV are not classified in the fair value hierarchy
Valuations may be lagged 1 32 month to 6 32 months
The NAV will be adjusted for cash flows additional investments or contributions, and distributions through year end
We may make further adjustments for any known substantive valuation changes not reflected in the NAV
For 2015 32 and 2014, we made adjustments of 93  million 32 and 88  million, respectively, to adjust for private equity lagged valuations
For 2015 32 and 2014, we made adjustments of 49 million 32 and 33 million, respectively, to adjust for real estate lagged valuations
The Ford Werke GmbH 8220 Ford Werke 8221 defined benefit plan is funded through the investment in a group insurance contract
At year end 2015, we measured the fair value of the insurance asset by projecting expected future cash flows from the contract and discounting them to present value based on current market rates including an assessment for non 8209 performance risk of the insurance company
The assumptions used to project expected future cash flows are based on actuarial estimates and are unobservable therefore the contract is Level 3
This measurement represents a change in valuation technique from prior periods in which we used the contract value provided by the insurance provider i
We have concluded the new valuation method provides a better representation of fair value
FS 37FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued The fair value of our defined benefit pension plan assets including dividends and interest receivables of 363  million 32 and 94  million 32 for U
plans, respectively by asset category at December 31 was as follows in millions  2015  U
Plans  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Assets measured at NAV a  Total  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Assets measured at NAV a  TotalAsset Category                    Equity                    U
companies 1,935  4  8212  8212  1,939  1,647  1  8212  86  1,734International companies1,082  10  1  7  1,100  1,290  292  1  29  1,612Total equity3,017  14  1  7  3,039  2,937  293  1  115  3,346Fixed Income                    U
government5,209  8212  8212  8212  5,209  138  8212  8212  8212  138U
government sponsored enterprises b 8212  3,106  8212  8212  3,106  8212  10  8212  8212  10Non U
c 8220 Investment grade 8221 bonds are those rated Baa3 BBB or higher by at least two rating agencies 8220 High yield 8221 bonds are those rated below investment grade 8220 Other credit 8221 refers to non rated bonds
plans, funds investing in diverse hedge fund strategies with the following composition of underlying hedge fund investments at December  31, 2015   global macro 34 , event driven 20 , equity long short 24 , multi strategy 19 , and relative value 3
plans, funds investing in diversified portfolio of underlying hedge funds
At December  31, 2015, the composition of underlying hedge fund investments within the United Kingdom and Canada pension plans was  equity long short 38 , event driven 26 , global macro 17 , multi 8209 strategy 12 , and relative value 7
plans, diversified investments in private equity funds with the following strategies   buyout 59 , venture capital 31 , mezzanine distressed 5 , and other 5
Allocations are estimated based on latest available data for managers reflecting June  30,  2015 32 holdings
plans, investments in private investment funds funds of funds pursuing strategies broadly classified as venture capital and buyouts
plans, investment in private property funds broadly classified as core 42 , value added and opportunistic 58
plans, investment in private property funds broadly classified as core 41 , value added and opportunistic 59
h Primarily short term investment funds to provide liquidity to plan investment managers and cash held to pay benefits
plans, primarily cash related to net pending security purchases sales and net pending foreign currency purchases sales
S  plans, primarily Ford Werke, plan assets insurance contract valued at 4
4  billion 32 at year end 2015 and cash related to net pending security purchases sales and net pending foreign currency purchases sales
FS 38FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued The fair value of our defined benefit pension plan assets including dividends and interest receivables of 360  million 32 and 112  million 32 for U
plans, respectively by asset category at December 31 was as follows in millions  2014  U
Plans  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Assets measured at NAV a  Total  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Assets measured at NAV a  TotalAsset Category                    Equity                    U
companies 2,678  2  8212  8212  2,680  2,119  8212  8212  149  2,268International companies1,510  21  8212  7  1,538  1,910  171  8212  25  2,106Total equity4,188  23  8212  7  4,218  4,029  171  8212  174  4,374Fixed Income                    U
government4,506  8212  8212  8212  4,506  92  8212  8212  8212  92U
government sponsored enterprises b 8212  4,047  8212  8212  4,047  8212  24  8212  8212  24Non U
c 8220 Investment grade 8221 bonds are those rated Baa3 BBB or higher by at least two rating agencies 8220 High yield 8221 bonds are those rated below investment grade 8220 Other credit 8221 refers to non rated bonds
plans, funds investing in diverse hedge fund strategies with the following composition of underlying hedge fund investments at December  31, 2014   global macro 28 , event driven 26 , equity long short 26 , multi strategy 14 , and relative value 7
plans, funds investing in diversified portfolio of underlying hedge funds
At December  31, 2014, the composition of underlying hedge fund investments within the United Kingdom and Canada pension plans was   equity long short 39 , event driven 33 , global macro 13 , multi strategy 10 , and relative value 5
plans, diversified investments in private equity funds with the following strategies   buyout 62 , venture capital 27 , mezzanine distressed 6 , and other 5
Allocations are estimated based on latest available data for managers reflecting June  30,  2014 32 holdings
plans, investments in private investment funds funds of funds pursuing strategies broadly classified as venture capital and buyouts
plans, investment in private property funds broadly classified as core 42 , value added and opportunistic 58
plans, investment in private property funds broadly classified as core 39 , value added and opportunistic 61
h Primarily short term investment funds to provide liquidity to plan investment managers and cash held to pay benefits
plans, primarily cash related to net pending security purchases sales and net pending foreign currency purchases sales
S  plans, primarily Ford Werke, plan assets insurance contract valued at 3
8  billion 32 at year end 2014 and cash related to net pending security purchases sales and net pending foreign currency purchases sales
FS 39FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued The following table summarizes the changes in Level 3 defined benefit pension plan assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis for the year ended December  31 32 in millions  2015   Return on plan assets       U
Plans            Asset Category            Equity            International companies 8212  8212  8212  8212  1  1Total equity 8212  8212 8212 8212 11Other a 4,725  531  8212  8212  8212  5,256Total Level 3 fair value 4,725  531 8212 8212 1 5,257 a Primarily Ford Werke plan assets insurance contract valued at 4
Return on plan assets attributable to assets held at December 31, 2015 reflects a change in valuation technique totaling 725 million noted in the alternative assets section of the pension plan asset information
FS 40FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  12
RETIREMENT BENEFITS 32 Continued The following table summarizes the changes in Level 3 defined benefit pension plan assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis for the year ended December  31 32 in millions  2014   Return on plan assets       U
Plans FairValueatJanuary 1  Attributableto AssetsHeldatDecember 31  AttributabletoAssetsSold  Net Purchases Settlements  Transfers Into Out of Level 3  FairValueatDecember 31Asset Category            Equity            U
companies 3  8212  3  8212  8212  8212 International companies1  8212  1  8212  8212  8212 Total equity4  8212  4  8212  8212  8212 Fixed Income           Corporate bonds           Other credit 8212  8212  8212  8212  14  14Mortgage other asset backed33  8212  8212  34  33  34Total fixed income33  8212  8212  34  19  48Other1  8212  8212  1  8212  8212 Total Level 3 fair value 38  8212  4  33  19  48             Non U
Plans            Asset Category            Equity            International companies 2  8212  1  1  8212  8212 Total equity2 8212 1 1 8212 8212 Fixed Income           Non U
government67  2  8212  12  53  8212 Corporate bonds           Investment grade55  3  8212  17  41  8212 High yield21  8212  8212  15  6  8212 Other credit13  8212  8212  7  6  8212 Mortgage other asset backed14  8212  8212  4  10  8212 Total fixed income1701 8212 55 116 8212 Other a 5,198  8212  282  191  8212  4,725Total Level 3 fair value 5,370 1 283 247 116 4,725 a Primarily Ford Werke plan assets insurance contract valued at 3
DEBT AND COMMITMENTS 32  Our debt consists of short term and long term secured and unsecured debt securities, and secured and unsecured borrowings from banks and other lenders
Debt issuances are placed directly by us or through securities dealers or underwriters and are held by institutional and retail investors
In addition, Ford Credit sponsors securitization programs that provide short term and long term asset backed financing through institutional investors in the U
Debt is reported on our balance sheet at par value adjusted for unamortized discount or premium, unamortized issuance costs, and adjustments related to designated fair value hedges see Note  16
Discounts, premiums, and costs directly related to the issuance of debt are capitalized and amortized over the life of the debt or to the put date and are recorded in Interest expense 32 using the effective interest method
Gains and losses on the extinguishment of debt are recorded in Automotive interest income and other income loss , net 32 and Financial Services other income loss , net
FS 41FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  13
DEBT AND COMMITMENTS 32 Continued The carrying value of Automotive sector and Financial Services sector debt at December 31 was as follows in millions      Interest Rates      Average Contractual a   Average Effective b Automotive Sector2015  2014  2015  2014  2015  2014Debt payable within one year            Short term 818  373  7
6 Total Automotive sector 12,839  13,824                     Fair value of Automotive sector debt d 14,199  15,553                     Financial Services Sector            Short term debt            Unsecured debt 10,268  9,761         Asset backed debt1,855  1,377         Total short term debt12,123  11,138  1
9 Long term debt            Unsecured debt            Notes payable within one year10,241  8,795         Notes payable after one year49,193  43,087         Asset backed debt            Notes payable within one year18,855  16,738         Notes payable after one year29,390  25,216         Adjustments            Unamortized discount premium 29  55         Unamortized issuance costs c 216  8212         Fair value adjustments e 458  428         Total long term debt107,892  94,209  2
9 Total Financial Services sector 120,015  105,347                     Fair value of Financial Services sector debt d 121,170  107,758         a Average contractual rates reflect the stated contractual interest rate
b Average effective rates reflect the average contractual interest rate plus amortization of discounts, premiums, and issuance costs
c The new accounting standard regarding the presentation of debt issuance costs was adopted in the current period and applied prospectively
d The fair value of debt includes 560  million 32 and 131  million 32 of Automotive sector short term debt and 10
8  billion 32 of Financial Services sector short term debt at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively, carried at cost which approximates fair value
All debt is categorized within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy
e Adjustments related to designated fair value hedges of unsecured debt
FS 42FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  13
DEBT AND COMMITMENTS 32 Continued The fair value of debt reflects interest accrued but not yet paid
Interest accrued on Automotive debt was 213  million 32 and 180 million 32 at December  31,  2015  and 2014, respectively
Interest accrued on Financial Services debt was 568  million 32 and 602 million 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively
Accrued interest is reported in Other liabilities and deferred revenue
We paid interest of 693  million, 774  million, and 746  million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively, on Automotive debt
8  billion 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively, on Financial Services debt
FS 43FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  13
75 Notes due January 15, 20432,000  2,000Total public unsecured debt securities c 6,594 6,795 a Listed on the Luxembourg Exchange and on the Singapore Exchange
215 32 Debentures due September  15,  2021 32 with an outstanding balance at December  31, 2015 32 of 180  million
The proceeds from these securities were on lent by Ford to Ford Holdings to fund Financial Services activity and are reported as Financial Services debt
DOE ATVM Incentive ProgramIn September 2009, we entered into a Loan Arrangement and Reimbursement Agreement with the DOE, under which we borrowed through multiple draws 5
9  billion 32 to finance certain costs for fuel efficient, advanced technology vehicles
The principal amount of the ATVM loan bears interest at a blended rate based on the U
Treasury yield curve at the time each draw was made with the weighted average interest rate on all such draws being about 2
The ATVM loan is repayable in equal quarterly 32 installments of 148  million, which began in September 2012 32 and will end in June 2022
Automotive Credit FacilitiesLenders under our Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 30, 2015 and as further amended the 8220 revolving credit facility 8221 have commitments to us totaling 13
4  billion, with 75 32 of the commitments maturing on April  30,  2020 and 25 32 of the commitments maturing on April 30, 2018
We have allocated 3  billion 32 of commitments to Ford Credit on an irrevocable and exclusive basis to support its liquidity
Any borrowings by Ford Credit under the revolving credit facility would be guaranteed by us
The revolving credit facility is unsecured and free of material adverse change conditions to borrowing, restrictive financial covenants for  example, interest or fixed charge coverage ratio, debt to equity ratio, and minimum net worth requirements , and credit rating triggers that could limit our ability to obtain funding
The revolving credit facility contains a liquidity covenant that requires us to maintain a minimum of 4  billion 32 in aggregate of domestic cash, cash equivalents, and loaned and marketable securities and or availability under the revolving credit facility
If our senior, unsecured, long 8209 term debt does not maintain at least two investment grade ratings from Fitch, Moody 8217 s, and S amp P, the guarantees of certain subsidiaries will be required
FS 44FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  13
DEBT AND COMMITMENTS 32 Continued At December  31, 2015, the utilized portion of the revolving credit facility was 48  million, representing amounts utilized as letters of credit
5 billion 32 of local credit facilities available to non U
Automotive affiliates, of which 836  million 32 had been utilized
Financial Services SectorAsset Backed DebtAt December  31, 2015, the carrying value of our asset backed debt was 50  billion
This secured debt is issued by Ford Credit and includes asset backed securities used to fund operations and maintain liquidity
Assets securing the related debt issued as part of all our securitization transactions are included in our consolidated results and are based upon the legal transfer of the underlying assets in order to reflect legal ownership and the beneficial ownership of the debt holder
The third party investors in the securitization transactions have legal recourse only to the assets securing the debt and do not have such recourse to us, except for the customary representation and warranty provisions or when we are counterparty to certain derivative transactions of the special purpose entities 8220 SPEs 8221
In addition, the cash flows generated by the assets are restricted only to pay such liabilities Ford Credit retains the right to residual cash flows
Although not contractually required, we regularly support our wholesale securitization programs by repurchasing receivables of a dealer from a SPE when the dealer 8217 s performance is at risk, which transfers the corresponding risk of loss from the SPE to us
In order to continue to fund the wholesale receivables, we also may contribute additional cash or wholesale receivables if the collateral falls below required levels
The balances of cash related to these contributions were 0 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, and ranged from 0 32 to 72  million 32 during 2015 32 and 0  to  242  million 32 during 2014
SPEs that are exposed to interest rate or currency risk may reduce their risks by entering into derivative transactions
In certain instances, we have entered into derivative transactions with the counterparty to protect the counterparty from risks absorbed through derivative transactions with the SPEs
Derivative income expense related to the derivative transactions that support Ford Credit 8217 s securitization programs were 2  million, 4  million, and 25  million 32 for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014 32 and 2013, respectively
See Note  16 32 for additional information regarding the accounting for derivatives
Interest expense on securitization debt was 630  million, 595  million, and 640  million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
The assets and liabilities related to our asset backed debt arrangements included on our financial statements at December 31 were as follows in billions  2015  2014Assets    Cash and cash equivalents 4
3 a Debt is net of unamortized discount and issuance costs
Committed Credit FacilitiesAt December  31, 2015, Ford Credit 8217 s committed capacity totaled 38
Ford Credit 8217 s committed capacity is primarily comprised of unsecured credit facilities with financial institutions, committed asset backed security lines from bank sponsored commercial paper conduits and other financial institutions, and allocated commitments under the revolving credit facility
FS 45FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  14
32 32 REDEEMABLE NONCONTROLLING INTEREST 32 The redeemable noncontrolling interest in our Ford Sollers Netherlands B
8220 Ford Sollers 8221 joint venture is discussed in Note 22
8220 AAI 8221 was a 50 50 32 joint venture between Ford and Mazda Motor Corporation 8220 Mazda 8221 that owned an automobile assembly plant in Flat Rock, Michigan
In January 2015, Mazda exercised its put option and Ford purchased Mazda 8217 s 50 32 equity interest at the exercise price plus accrued interest of 342 million 32 included in Cash flows from financing activities 32 in our statement of cash flows and dissolved AAI
VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES 32 A VIE is an entity that either i has insufficient equity to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support, or ii has equity investors who lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest
We consolidate VIEs of which we are the primary beneficiary
We consider ourselves the primary beneficiary of a VIE when we have both the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the entity 8217 s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE
Assets recognized as a result of consolidating these VIEs do not represent additional assets that could be used to satisfy claims against our general assets
Conversely, liabilities recognized as a result of consolidating these VIEs do not represent additional claims on our general assets rather, they represent claims against the specific assets of the consolidated VIEs
We have the power to direct the significant activities of an entity when our management has the ability to make key operating decisions, such as decisions regarding capital or product investment or manufacturing production schedules
For securitization entities, we have the power to direct significant activities when we have the ability to exercise discretion in the servicing of financial assets including general collection activity on current and non current accounts and loss mitigation efforts including repossession and sale of collateral , issue additional debt, exercise a unilateral call option, add assets to revolving structures, or control investment decisions
VIEs of Which We are Not the Primary BeneficiaryCertain of our joint ventures are VIEs, in which the power to direct economically significant activities is shared with the joint venture partner
Our investments in these joint ventures are accounted for as equity method investments
Our maximum exposure to any potential losses associated with these joint ventures is limited to our investment, including loans, and was 251  million 32 and 307  million 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectivelyVIEs of Which We are the Primary BeneficiarySecuritization Entities
Through Ford Credit, we securitize, transfer, and service financial assets associated with consumer finance receivables, operating leases, and wholesale loans
Our securitization transactions typically involve the legal transfer of financial assets to bankruptcy remote SPEs
We generally retain economic interests in the asset backed securitization transactions, which are retained in the form of senior or subordinated interests, cash reserve accounts, residual interests, and servicing rights
For accounting purposes, we are precluded from recording the transfers of assets in securitization transactions as sales
In most cases, the bankruptcy remote SPEs meet the definition of VIEs for which we have determined we have both the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact the entity 8217 s performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the entity that could be significant, and would therefore also be consolidated
We account for all securitization transactions as if they were secured financing and therefore the assets, liabilities, and related activity of these transactions are consolidated in our financial results and are included in amounts presented on the face of our consolidated balance sheet
See Note  13 32 for additional information on the accounting for asset backed debt and the assets securing this debt
FS 46FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  16
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIES 32 In the normal course of business, our operations are exposed to global market risks, including the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, certain commodity prices, and interest rates
Our derivatives are over the counter customized derivative transactions and are not exchange traded
We review our hedging program, derivative positions, and overall risk management strategy on a regular basis
Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedge Accounting
Derivatives are recorded on the balance sheet at fair value and presented on a gross basis
Derivative assets are reported in Other assets 32 and derivative liabilities are reported in Payables 32 and Other liabilities and deferred revenue
We have elected to apply hedge accounting to certain derivatives
Derivatives that are designated in hedging relationships are evaluated for effectiveness using regression analysis at the time they are designated and throughout the hedge period
Some derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting for others, we elect not to apply hedge accounting
Our Automotive sector has designated certain forward contracts as cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions with exposure to foreign currency exchange and commodity price risks
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of cash flow hedges is deferred in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss and is recognized in Automotive cost of sales 32 when the hedged item affects earnings
The ineffective portion is reported in Automotive cost of sales in the period of measurement
Our policy is to de designate foreign currency exchange cash flow hedges prior to the time forecasted transactions are recognized as assets or liabilities on the balance sheet and report subsequent changes in fair value through Automotive cost of sales
If it becomes probable that the originally forecasted transaction will not occur, the related amount included in Accumulated other comprehensive income loss is reclassified and recognized in earnings
The majority of our cash flow hedges mature in two 32 years or less
Our Financial Services sector 32 uses derivatives to reduce the risk of changes in the fair value of debt
We have designated certain receive fixed, pay float interest rate swaps as fair value hedges of fixed rate debt
The risk being hedged is the risk of changes in the fair value of the hedged debt attributable to changes in the benchmark interest rate
If the hedge relationship is deemed to be highly effective, we record the changes in the fair value of the hedged debt related to the risk being hedged in Financial Services debt 32 with the offset in Financial Services other income loss , net
32 32 The change in fair value of the related derivative excluding accrued interest also is recorded in Financial Services other income loss , net
32 32 Net interest settlements and accruals on fair value hedges are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are reported in Interest expense
The cash flows associated with fair value hedges are reported in Net cash provided by used in operating activities 32 on our statement of cash flows
When a fair value hedge is de designated, or when the derivative is terminated before maturity, the fair value adjustment to the hedged debt continues to be reported as part of the carrying value of the debt and is amortized over its remaining life
Our Automotive sector reports changes in the fair value of derivatives not designated as hedging instruments through Automotive cost of sales
Cash flows associated with non designated or de designated derivatives are reported in Net cash provided by used in investing activities 32 on our statements of cash flows
FS 47FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  16
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIES 32 Continued Our Financial Services sector reports net interest settlements and accruals and changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps not designated as hedging instruments in Financial Services other income loss , net
Foreign currency revaluation on accrued interest along with gains and losses on foreign exchange contracts and cross currency interest rate swaps are reported in Financial Services other income loss , net
Cash flows associated with non designated or de 173 designated derivatives are reported in Net cash provided by used in investing activities 32 on our statements of cash flows
We have elected to apply the normal purchases and normal sales classification for physical supply contracts that are entered into for the purpose of procuring commodities to be used in production over a reasonable period in the normal course of our business
b For 2015, 2014, and 2013, hedge ineffectiveness reflects the net change in fair value on derivatives of 72  million 32 gain, 407  million 32 gain, and 658  million 32 loss 32 respectively, and change in value on hedged debt attributable to the change in benchmark interest rates of 69  million 32 loss, 387  million 32 loss, and 614  million 32 gain, respectively
FS 48FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  16
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIES 32 Continued Balance Sheet Effect of Derivative Financial Instruments Derivative assets and liabilities are recorded on the balance sheet at fair value and are presented on a gross basis
The notional amounts of the derivative instruments do not necessarily represent amounts exchanged by the parties and are not a direct measure of our financial exposure
We also enter into master agreements with counterparties that may allow for netting of exposures in the event of default or breach of the counterparty agreement
FS 49FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  17
plans 11  2  25 Other comprehensive income loss , net of tax 81  23  47 Ending balance 2,745  2,664  2,641       Total AOCI ending balance at December 31 6,257  5,265  5,024 a The accumulated translation adjustments related to an investment in a foreign subsidiary are reclassified to Automotive interest income and other income loss , net, Financial Services other income loss , net, or Equity in net income of affiliated companies
b Includes a 2 million 32 gain 32 on available for sale securities held by an unconsolidated subsidiary of Ford Motor Company
c We expect to reclassify existing net gains 32 of 132 million 32 from Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 to Automotive cost of sales 32 during the next twelve months as the underlying exposures are realized
d Gains Losses on cash flow hedges are reclassified from Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 to income when the hedged item affects earnings and is recognized in Automotive cost of sales
e This Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 component is included in the computation of net periodic pension cost
FS 50FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  18
SHARE BASED EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION 32 We issue to our employees restricted stock units 8220 RSUs 8221 , which consist of time based and performance based awards
RSUs provide the recipients with the right to shares of Common Stock following a specified performance period and or vesting period
Time based awards generally have a vesting feature whereby one third 32 of each  grant of RSUs vests after the first anniversary of the grant date, one third 32 after the second anniversary, and one third 32 after the third anniversary
Performance based RSUs vest at the end of the specified performance period, generally three years, assuming required metrics are met
Performance based RSUs have two components one based on Ford 8217 s internal financial performance metrics, and the other based on Ford 8217 s total shareholder return relative to total shareholder returns of an industrial and automotive peer group
We issue new shares of Common Stock upon vesting of RSUs
The fair value of both the time based and the portion of the performance based RSUs pertaining to internal performance metrics is determined using the closing price of our Common Stock
32 32 The fair value of time based RSUs is expensed over the shorter of the vesting period, using the graded vesting method, 32 or the time period an employee becomes eligible to retain the award at retirement
The fair value of performance based RSUs is expensed when it is probable and estimable as measured against the performance metrics over the shorter of the performance or required service periods
32 32 Expense is recorded in Selling, administrative, and other expenses
Share based compensation awards outstanding at December  31, 2015 32 consist of awards granted to employees under two Long Term Incentive Plans 8220 LTIP 8221 the 1998  LTIP and the  2008  LTIP
No further grants may be made under the 1998 LTIP
Under the 2008  LTIP, the number of shares that may be granted in any year is limited to 2 32 of our issued and outstanding Common Stock as of December  31 32 of the prior calendar year
Any unused portion is available for awards in later years
The limit may be increased up to 3 32 in any year, with a corresponding reduction in shares available for grants in future years
At December  31, 2015, the number of unused shares carried forward was 344  million 32 shares
FS 51FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  19
SHARE BASED EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION 32 Continued 32 The performance based RSUs granted in March 2015 include a relative Total Shareholder Return 8220 TSR 8221 metric
We estimate the fair value of the TSR component of the performance based RSUs using a Monte Carlo simulation
Inputs and assumptions used to calculate the fair value at grant date were as follows  2015Fair value per stock award 16
03Assumptions  Ford 8217 s stock price expected volatility a 23
3 Expected average volatility of peer companies a 24
74 a Expected volatility based on three years 32 of daily closing share price changes ending on the grant date
During 2015, activity for RSUs was as follows in millions, except for weighted average fair value   Shares  Weighted Average Fair ValueOutstanding, beginning of year  23
9  N AThe table above also includes shares awarded to non employee directors
At December 31, 2015, there were 218,184  shares vested, but unissued
Additional information about RSUs for the years ended December 31 was as follows in millions, except for weighted average fair value  2015  2014  2013Fair value of vested shares 126  102  101Weighted average fair value per unit 15
77Compensation cost a 125  95  81 a Net of tax benefit of 65 million, 49 million, and 48 million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
As of December  31, 2015, there was approximately 87  million 32 in unrecognized compensation cost related to non 8209 vested RSUs
This expense will be recognized over a weighted average period of 1
FS 52FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  19
SHARE BASED EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION 32 Continued Stock OptionsDuring 2015, no stock options were issued to our employees
As of December 31, 2015, the last of our outstanding stock options will expire in July 2024, if not exercised sooner
We measure the fair value of our stock options using the Black Scholes option pricing model and record expense in Selling, administrative, and other expenses
For the years ended December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, stock options outstanding were 45
8 million, respectively, and stock options exercisable were 39
For the year ended December  31, 2015, the intrinsic value for vested and unvested stock options was 189  million 32 and 3  million, respectively
The average remaining terms for fully vested stock options and unvested stock options were 4 years 32 and 7
We received approximately 151  million 32 in proceeds from the exercise of stock options in 2015
An equivalent of approximately 272  million 32 in new issues was used to settle exercised stock options
Compensation cost for stock options for the year ended December  31, 2015 32 was 7  million, net of tax benefit of 3 million
As of December  31, 2015, there was approximately 3  million 32 in unrecognized compensation cost related to non vested stock options
EMPLOYEE SEPARATION ACTIONS AND EXIT AND DISPOSAL ACTIVITIES 32 We record costs associated with voluntary separations at the time of employee acceptance, unless the acceptance requires explicit approval by the Company
We record costs associated with involuntary separation programs when management has approved the plan for separation, the affected employees are identified, and it is unlikely that actions required to complete the separation plan will change significantly
When a plan of separation requires approval by or consultation with the relevant labor organization or government, the costs are recorded after the required approval or consultation process is complete
Costs associated with benefits that are contingent on the employee continuing to provide service are accrued over the required service period
Additionally, under certain labor agreements, we are required to pay transitional benefits to our employees who are idled
For employees who are temporarily idled, we expense the benefits on an as incurred basis
For employees who are permanently idled, we expense all of the future benefit payments in the period when it is probable that the employees will be permanently idled
Our reserve balance for these future benefit payments to permanently idled employees takes into account several factors   the demographics of the population at each affected facility, redeployment alternatives, estimate of benefits to be paid, and recent experience relative to voluntary redeployments
Automotive SectorWe committed to transformation plans for our Europe and Australia operations in 2012 and 2013, respectively
Separation related costs excluding pension costs totaled 1
1  billion 32 for the Europe plan and are estimated to be 220  million 32 for the Australian plan
Amounts remaining are recorded in Other liabilities and deferred revenue
Separation related expense recorded in Automotive cost of sales 32 and Selling, administrative, and other expenses include costs associated with voluntary separation programs, involuntary employee actions, and payments to affected suppliers
The separation related activity for the years ended December  31 32 was as follows in millions  2015  2014Beginning balance 841  497Changes in accruals31  630Payments 617  189 Foreign currency translation 41  97 Ending balance 214  841FS 53FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  21
32 32 INCOME TAXES 32 We recognize income tax related penalties in the Provision for Benefit from income taxes 32 on our consolidated income statement
We recognize income tax related interest income and interest expense in Automotive interest income and other income loss , net 32 and Financial Services other income loss , net 32 on our consolidated income statement
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets and LiabilitiesDeferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences that exist between the financial statement carrying value of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards on a taxing jurisdiction basis
We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that will apply in the years in which we expect the temporary differences to be recovered or paid
Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of the likely future tax consequences of events that have been recognized on our financial statements or tax returns and their future probability
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider both positive and negative evidence related to the likelihood of realization of the deferred tax assets
If, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized, we record a valuation allowance
Components of Income TaxesComponents of income taxes excluding cumulative effects of changes in accounting principles, other comprehensive income, and equity in net results of affiliated companies accounted for after tax, for the years ended December 31 were as follows  2015  2014  2013Income before income taxes in millions      U
4,878  2,618  2,053Total 10,252  1,234  14,371Provision for Benefit from income taxes in millions      Current      Federal 75  2  19 Non U
572  389  453State and local17  22  40 Total current664  365  394Deferred      Federal1,494  735  1,821Non U
472    603State and local251  214  393 Total deferred2,217  361  2,031Total 2,881  4  2,425Reconciliation of effective tax rate      U
9  FS 54FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  21
32 32 INCOME TAXES 32 Continued Included in 8220 Dispositions and restructurings 8221 for 2013, is the recognition of deferred tax assets for investments in our European operations
We recognize deferred tax assets related to investments in affiliates when it becomes apparent they will be realized in the foreseeable future
In the fourth quarter of 2013, we restructured certain of our European affiliates
We made tax elections to include the operating results of these affiliates in our U
As a result, we realized tax benefits related to investments in these European affiliates and recorded deferred tax assets of 1
earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the United States, for which deferred taxes have not been provided
Repatriation of these earnings in their entirety would result in a residual U
earnings considered indefinitely reinvested in operations outside of the United States reflects accumulated earnings determined under U
8 billion 32 primarily for deferred tax assets related to our South America operations
Operating loss carryforwards for tax purposes were 6  billion 32 at December  31, 2015, resulting in a deferred tax asset of 2
The remaining losses begin to expire in 2016, though a substantial portion expire beyond 2017
Tax credits available to offset future tax liabilities are 6
A  substantial portion of these credits have a remaining carryforward period of 5  years or more
Tax benefits of operating loss and tax credit carryforwards are evaluated on an ongoing basis, including a review of historical and projected future operating results, the eligible carryforward period, and other circumstances
FS 55FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  21
2  billion 32 at December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, respectively
Examinations by tax authorities have been completed through 2004 in Germany, 2007 in Canada, 2011 in the United States, 2012 in China, and 2013 in the United  Kingdom
Although examinations have been completed in these jurisdictions, limited transfer pricing disputes exist for years dating back to 1996
We recorded on our consolidated income statement 3  million, 96  million, and 11  million 32 in income tax related net interest income for the years ended December  31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
As of December  31, 2015 32 and 2014, we had recorded a net payable of 93  million 32 and a net receivable of 23  million, respectively, for tax related interest
We paid income taxes of 585 million, 467 million, and 538 million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively
32 32 CHANGES IN INVESTMENTS IN AFFILIATES 32 Automotive SectorFord Sollers
We formed the Ford Sollers joint venture with Sollers OJSC 8220 Sollers 8221 in October 2011 to operate in Russia
Upon contribution of our then wholly owned operations in Russia to the joint venture in exchange for cash, notes receivable and a 50 32 equity interest in the new joint venture, we deconsolidated the related assets and liabilities and recorded an equity method investment in Ford Sollers at its fair value
The fair value was calculated using a discounted cash flow analysis with our best assumptions of relevant factors at that time
During the second quarter of 2014, we recorded a 329 million 32 pre tax impairment as a result of factors in the Russian market, including a weaker ruble, lower industry volume, and industry segmentation changes that negatively impacted the sales of Focus
These factors reduced our expected cash flows for Ford Sollers in the near term, thereby reducing the investment 8217 s fair value
The non cash charge was reported in Equity in net income of affiliated companies
On March 31, 2015, we and Sollers agreed to certain changes to the structure of the joint venture and the related shareholders 8217 agreement to support the business in the near term and provide a platform for future growth in this important market
The changes include Ford providing additional funding to the joint venture and gaining a controlling interest in the joint venture through the acquisition of preferred shares
As a result, effective March 31, 2015, we have consolidated the joint venture for financial reporting purposes
In addition, the partners will have future rights to purchase, or have purchased, Sollers 8217 50 32 interest in the ordinary shares of the joint venture at a value established using a pre determined framework
Both partners will continue to work jointly to improve the business outlook for the Ford Sollers joint venture by expanding the joint venture 8217 s vehicle lineup to better meet the needs of Russian customers and further investing in the localization of component manufacturing
FS 56FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  22
32 32 CHANGES IN INVESTMENTS IN AFFILIATES 32 Continued During the second quarter of 2015, we finalized our purchase accounting
We measured the fair value of Ford Sollers using the income approach
We used cash flows that reflect the Ford Sollers business plan, aligned with assumptions a market participant would have made
We assumed a discount rate of 17 32 based on the appropriate weighted average cost of capital, adjusted for perceived business risks related to regulatory concerns, political tensions, foreign exchange volatility, and risk associated with the Russian automotive industry
In addition, we recorded a 93 million 32 redeemable noncontrolling interest in the mezzanine section of our balance sheet, reflecting the redemption features embedded in the 50 32 equity interest in the joint venture that is held by Sollers
To determine the noncontrolling interest value, we used a Monte Carlo simulation analysis that incorporated market participant assumptions for asset volatilities and credit spreads
BDT was a joint venture in Mexico created in 2001 by Ford and Navistar that produced medium duty commercial trucks
During the second quarter of 2015, we sold our entire equity interest in BDT to a Navistar affiliate and the joint venture was terminated
As a result of the sale of our interest in BDT, we recognized a pre tax gain of 19 million, which was reported in Automotive interest income and other income loss , net
Prior to July 1, 2015, Nemak formerly named Tenedora Nemak, S
was a joint venture between Ford and Mexican conglomerate Alfa, S
Nemak supplies aluminum engine and other components from its plants located in regions in which we do business
Ford and Alfa terminated the joint venture agreement, and in July 2015 Nemak completed an initial public offering 8220 IPO 8221 of its common stock, and Ford 8217 s ownership interest in Nemak was diluted
As a result of the IPO and the termination of the joint venture agreement, we no longer account for Nemak using the equity method of accounting
Instead, we account for our Nemak shares as marketable securities
The initial pre tax gain of 150 million 32 from the IPO and subsequent mark to market adjustments for our Nemak shares are reported in Automotive interest income and other income loss , net
Prior to December 31, 2014, we included the results of our Venezuelan operations in our consolidated financial statements using the consolidation method of accounting
Venezuelan exchange control regulations resulted in an other than temporary lack of exchangeability between the Venezuelan bolivar and U
dollar, and restricted our Venezuelan operations 8217 ability to pay dividends and obligations denominated in U
These exchange regulations, combined with other Venezuelan regulations, constrained parts availability and significantly limited our Venezuelan operations 8217 ability to maintain normal production
As a result of these conditions, and in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 8220 ASC 8221 810 Consolidation, we began reporting the results of our Venezuelan operations using the cost method of accounting
This change, which we made effective December  31,  2014, resulted in a fourth quarter 2014 one time pre tax charge of 800  million 32 in Automotive interest income and other income loss , net
FS 57FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  23
CAPITAL STOCK AND EARNINGS PER SHARE 32 All general voting power is vested in the holders of Common Stock and Class B Stock
Holders of our Common Stock have 60 32 of the general voting power and holders of our Class B Stock are entitled to such number of votes per share as will give them the remaining 40
Shares of Common Stock and Class B Stock share equally in dividends when and as paid, with stock dividends payable in shares of stock of the class held
If liquidated, each share of Common Stock is entitled to the first 0
50 32 available for distribution to holders of Common Stock and Class B Stock, each share of Class B Stock is entitled to the next 1
00 32 so available, each share of Common Stock is entitled to the next 0
50 32 so available, and each share of Common and Class B Stock is entitled to an equal amount thereafter
We present both basic and diluted earnings per share 8220 EPS 8221 amounts in our financial reporting
Basic EPS excludes dilution and is computed by dividing income available to Common and Class B Stock holders by the weighted average number of Common and Class B Stock outstanding for the period
Diluted EPS reflects the maximum potential dilution that could occur from our share based compensation, including 8220 in the money 8221 stock options and unvested RSUs
Potential dilutive shares are excluded from the calculation if they have an anti dilutive effect in the period
b In October 2014, we elected to terminate the conversion rights of holders under the 2016 Convertible Notes in accordance with their terms effective as of the close of business on November 20, 2014
On November 21, 2014, we redeemed for cash the remaining outstanding 2016 Convertible Notes
c Not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share due to their antidilutive effect are 87 million 32 shares for 2014 and the related income effect for the 2016 Convertible Notes
d In December 2013, we elected to terminate the conversion rights of holders under the 2036 Convertible Notes in accordance with their terms effective January 22, 2014
FS 58FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  24
SEGMENT INFORMATION 32 Our operating activity consists of two operating sectors, Automotive and Financial Services
Our Automotive sector includes the sale of Ford and Lincoln brand vehicles and related service parts and accessories
The Financial Services sector primarily includes our vehicle related financing and leasing activities at Ford Credit
Automotive SectorWe analyze the results of our Automotive sector through our five segments   North America, South America, Europe, Middle East amp Africa, and Asia Pacific
We report revenue on a 8220 where sold, 8221 absolute cost basis, which reflects the profit loss on the sale within the segment in which the ultimate sale is made to our external customer
Due to the integrated structure of our business, we allocate to each segment certain costs incurred at a corporate level and those performed by one segment on the behalf of other segments
Centrally managed net interest expense and market value adjustments are presented separately in the Other Automotive component of the Automotive sector
In addition, our Automotive sector results include Special Items that consist of i  pension and OPEB remeasurement gains and losses, ii personnel and dealer related items stemming from our efforts to match production capacity and cost structure to market demand and changing model mix, and iii certain infrequent significant items that we generally do not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operating activities
Our management excludes these items from its review of the results of the operating segments for purposes of measuring segment profitability and allocating resources
Special items are presented as a separate reconciling item
Financial Services SectorPrior to January 1, 2015, we had an Other Financial Services segment, which included holding companies, real estate, and the financing of some Volvo vehicles in Europe
Effective January 1, 2015, we realigned the business operations of this segment to our Automotive sector on a prospective basis
The impact of this change on our prior periods presented would have been immaterial
FS 59FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  24
b Interest income reflected on this line for Financial Services sector is non financing related
Interest income in the normal course of business for Financial Services sector is reported in Financial Services revenues
FS 61FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  25
FS 62FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  26
65 Certain of the quarterly results identified in the table above include material unusual or infrequently occurring items as follows on a pre tax basis, except for tax items The fourth quarter 2015 results include a pension and OPEB remeasurement loss of 698 million 32 see Note 1
The fourth quarter 2015 net income includes a tax benefit of 346 million 32 related to retroactive reinstatement of U
tax legislation in the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015
The fourth quarter 2014 results include a pension and OPEB remeasurement loss of 4
1 billion 32 see Note 1 , and a charge of 800  million 32 for Venezuela accounting change see Note 22
The fourth quarter of 2014 net income includes a tax benefit of 176 million 32 related to retroactive reinstatement of U
tax legislation in the Tax Increase Prevention Act of 2014
The first, second, third, and fourth quarter of 2014 results each include charges in Europe and Australia for separation related actions to support transformation plan of 122 million, 152 million,  million, and 247 million, respectively see Note  20
Third quarter 2014 net income includes a tax benefit of 245 million 32 resulting from a change in our method for measuring currency gains and losses in computing earnings of our European operations under U
The second quarter 2014 results include a charge of 329 million 32 for the equity impairment of Ford Sollers see Note  22
Effective December 31, 2015, we changed our method of accounting for certain components of our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans see Note 1
01FS 63FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  27
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES 32 Commitments and contingencies primarily consist of guarantees and indemnifications, litigation and claims, and warranty
Guarantees and IndemnificationsGuarantees and indemnifications are recorded at fair value at their inception
We regularly review our performance risk under these arrangements, and in the event it becomes probable we will be required to perform under guarantee or indemnity, the amount of probable payment is recorded
We guarantee debt and lease obligations of certain joint ventures, as well as certain financial obligations of outside third parties, including suppliers, to support our business and economic growth
Expiration dates vary through 2033, and guarantees will terminate on payment and or cancellation of the underlying obligation
A payment by us would be triggered by failure of the joint venture or other third party to fulfill its obligation covered by the guarantee
In some circumstances, we are entitled to recover from a third party amounts paid by us under the guarantee
However, our ability to enforce these rights is sometimes stayed until the guaranteed party is paid in full, and may be limited in the event of insolvency of the third party or other circumstances
In the ordinary course of business, we execute contracts involving indemnifications standard in the industry and indemnifications specific to a transaction, such as the sale of a business
These indemnifications might include and are not limited to claims relating to any of the following environmental, tax, and shareholder matters intellectual property rights power generation contracts governmental regulations and employment related matters dealer, supplier, and other commercial contractual relationships and financial matters, such as securitizations
Performance under these indemnities generally would be triggered by a breach of terms of the contract or by a third party claim
While some of these indemnifications are limited in nature, many of them do not limit potential payment
Therefore, we are unable to estimate a maximum amount of future payments that could result from claims made under these unlimited indemnities
The maximum potential payments and the carrying value of recorded liabilities related to guarantees and limited indemnities at December 31 were as follows in millions  2015  2014Maximum potential payments 284  592Carrying value of recorded liabilities related to guarantees and limited indemnities23  17Litigation and ClaimsVarious legal actions, proceedings, and claims generally, 8220 matters 8221 are pending or may be instituted or asserted against us
Certain of the pending legal actions are, or purport to be, class actions
Some of the matters involve or may involve claims for compensatory, punitive, or antitrust or other treble damages in very large amounts, or demands for field service actions, environmental remediation programs, sanctions, loss of government incentives, assessments, or other relief, which, if granted, would require very large expenditures
The extent of our financial exposure to these matters is difficult to estimate
Many matters do not specify a dollar amount for damages, and many others specify only a jurisdictional minimum
To the extent an amount is asserted, our historical experience suggests that in most instances the amount asserted is not a reliable indicator of the ultimate outcome
We accrue for matters when losses are deemed probable and reasonably estimable
In evaluating matters for accrual and disclosure purposes, we take into consideration factors such as our historical experience with matters of a similar nature, the specific facts and circumstances asserted, the likelihood that we will prevail, and the severity of any potential loss
We reevaluate and update our accruals as matters progress over time
For the majority of matters, which generally arise out of alleged defects in our products, we establish an accrual based on our extensive historical experience with similar matters
We do not believe there is a reasonably possible outcome materially in excess of our accrual for these matters
FS 64FORD MOTOR COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIESNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTSNOTE  27
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES 32 Continued For the remaining matters, where our historical experience with similar matters is of more limited value i
,  8220 non pattern matters 8221 , we evaluate the matters primarily based on the individual facts and circumstances
For non pattern matters, we evaluate whether there is a reasonable possibility of a material loss in excess of any accrual that can be estimated
Our estimate of reasonably possible loss in excess of our accruals for all material matters currently reflects indirect tax and customs matters, for which we estimate the aggregate risk to be a range of up to about 2
As noted, the litigation process is subject to many uncertainties, and the outcome of individual matters is not predictable with assurance
Our assessments are based on our knowledge and experience, but the ultimate outcome of any matter could require payment substantially in excess of the amount that we have accrued and or disclosed
Warranty and Field Service ActionsWe accrue obligations for warranty costs and field service actions i
, safety recalls, emission recalls, and other product campaigns at the time of sale using a patterned estimation model that includes historical information regarding the nature, frequency, and average cost of claims for each vehicle line by model year
Warranty and field service action obligations are reported in Other liabilities and deferred revenue
We reevaluate the adequacy of our accruals on a regular basis
We recognize the benefit from a recovery of the costs associated with our warranty and field service actions when specifics of the recovery have been agreed with our supplier and the amount of the recovery is virtually certain
Recoveries are reported in Receivables 32 and 32 Other assets
b Accounts and notes receivable deemed to be uncollectible as well as translation adjustments
d Includes 142 million, 428 million, and 243 million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively, of valuation allowance for deferred tax assets through Accumulated other comprehensive income loss 32 and 369 million, 399 million, and 47 million 32 in 2015, 2014, and 2013, respectively, of valuation allowance for deferred tax assets through the income statement
